Clans of Caledonia is a strategic economic game set in 19th-century Scotland.

During this period, Scotland made the transition from a predominantly agricultural economy to an industrialised one, heavily reliant on trade and export. As a consequence, food production increased to support the growth in population, cheap cotton imports increasingly replaced linen, and raising sheep gained importance. When European wine and brandy production was ravaged by a plague of insects in the late 19 th century, Scotch whisky was drafted as a substitute for cognac. The whisky industry exploded into life, turning it into the premium alcoholic beverage in Europe.

In Clans of Caledonia, players represent unique historical clans competing to produce, trade, and export agricultural goods, as well as their famous whisky!

Players: 1-4
Play time: 30 min per player
Age: 12 and up
Game Designer: Juma Al-JouJou
Illustrator: Klemens Franz
Publisher: Karma Games
www.karma-games.com

How-To-Play Videos: karma-games.com/clans-videos/
Rules FAQ: karma-games.com/clans-FAQ/
Other Languages: karma-games.com/clans-rules/

Game Components
Wooden tokens
Goods tokens:
10 Milk
14 Wool
10 Cheese
10 Grain
10 Bread
10 Whisky
Cotton
Tobacco
Sugar cane

Clan components:
16* Cows
16* Sheep
16* Bakeries
16* Fields
16* Distilleries
16* Cheese dairies
32* Workers
28* Merchants
4* Shipping tokens
4* Settlement tokens
4* Turn order tokens
4* Glory tokens

* in the 4 player colours

Cardboard
4 Map modules
1 Market board
1 Export board
4 Player boards
4 Export box tiles
9 Clan tiles
4 Glory tiles
8 Technology tiles
9 Starting tiles
12 Goods tiles
9 Scoring tiles
50 Export contract tiles
9 Port bonus tiles
70 Coins (30 Ones, 20 Fives and 20 Tens)
1 MacDonald tile
16* Port bonus marker tiles

Miscellaneous
6 Transparent price markers
2 Dice (Solo Game)
4 Player aids (English+German)
Scoresheet pad
2 Rulebooks (English and German)

-1-

Setup

First Play
When you play Clans of Caledonia for the first time, please consider playing with a simplified ruleset. See page 9 for simplification variants.

Note: Money and goods are unlimited; if the tokens run out players can use the Goods tiles or other suitable materials.

Map Modules
The game map consists of four double-sided Map modules which are labelled both by module (A-D) and by side (1-2), offering 16 different map configurations. Randomly choose a side for each Map module and construct the game map by making sure the rocks showing the module letter are in alphabetical order in a clockwise direction and are adjacent in the middle of the map (see picture).

Port Bonus Tiles
Shuffle all the Port bonus tiles and randomly choose four. Place one tile adjacent to a factory at each corner of the map, with its exact location depending on the player number. The 1-2 player icon indicates the space to put the Port bonus tiles in a 1 or 2 player game. The other arrow icon indicates the space for a 3 or 4 player game.
Return all unused Port bonus tiles back to the game box.

Market Board
Flip the Market board to the appropriate side for the number of players and place the transparent Price markers on the encircled starting prices. Place the six types of Goods tokens (Wool, Milk, Grain, Bread, Cheese and Whisky) and their tiles below the Market in separate piles.

Export Board
Place the Export board beside the map, with the side face-up showing the icon matching the number of players. Then, shuffle the Scoring tiles and choose five randomly. Place these face-up in a random order in the five slots on the edge of the Export board. Shuffle the Export contracts and create a face-down draw pile. Put one Export contract from the draw pile face-up on each box on the Export board (in a solo and 3 player game, one box remains empty). Place the players' Glory tokens and the Import tokens (Cotton, Tobacco and Sugar cane) off the board. On the 1-2 player side, the dice icons are only relevant for the solo game (see page 8).

-2-

Player Starting Items
Each player chooses a colour and takes one Player board and all of the game tokens of their colour. Then each player performs the following actions:

1. Place all of your tokens on the corresponding locations on your Player board, four of each of the following: Sheep, Cows, Cheese Dairies, Bakeries, Fields and Distilleries.

2. Place the eight Workers on the four forest locations (representing Woodcutters) and on the four mountain locations (representing Miners).

3. Take four Port markers and one Settlement token in your colour.

4. Fill the Merchant track with five cubes, representing Merchants. The remaining two cubes go below your Player board as starting stock.

5. Place the Shipping token on the first location on the left of the Shipping track.

6. Place the two Technology tiles flipped to the side with the arrow on the upper left-hand side on the respective locations below the Workers.

7. Take one Export box tile and place it next to your Player board with the side face-up showing the icon matching the number of players.

Turn Order
Determine a starting player randomly. The turn order in the first round is clockwise. Put all players' Turn order tokens accordingly on the Turn order track on the Export board. In subsequent rounds the turn order is determined by the order in which players pass.

Clans
Randomly draw one more Clan tile than the number of players (e.g. four Clan tiles in a 3 player game). Then, randomly draw as many Starting tiles as Clan tiles and randomly allocate one next to each Clan tile.

Starting with the last player and going in reverse turn order (counter-clockwise), each player chooses a Clan tile and its corresponding Starting tile and places both in front of themselves. The starting player will thus choose last and will choose between the remaining two clans. The clans are explained in detail in the appendix. Players receive both the Goods and the money shown on their Starting tiles.

2 player game

Note: Players may never hide any information.

Placing the first Workers
Beginning with the starting player and continuing in a clockwise order, each player places one Worker (Woodcutter or Miner) from the top of their Player board onto an empty hexagonal space on the game map. Woodcutters must be placed on an empty space with a forest and Miners must be placed on any empty space with a mountain (check the Expand section for more details, page 4).

Then in reverse turn order (starting with the player who placed last and continuing in counter-clockwise order), each player places a second Worker. The second Worker does not need to be adjacent to the first placed Worker. Each space can only ever have one unit (Worker, Sheep, Cow, Cheese dairy, Bakery, Field or Distillery) on it at any time.

Each time a Worker is placed (including during the initial setup) players must pay both for the land where they place their Worker and for the Worker itself. The cost of land is indicated by numbers on each space on the map, ranging from £1 to £6. The cost of a Worker is £6 for a Woodcutter and £10 for a Miner (as indicated above the Workers at the top of the Player boards).

Money Icons
Red numbers on the coin icon indicate a cost that you pay.
Black numbers indicate money that you receive.

Example: The space shown contains both forest and mountain. Thus, players can place either a Woodcutter (for £6 + £6 = £12) or a Miner (for £10 + £6 = £16) on this space.

-3-

Game Structure

There are five rounds and four Phases per round. Each round contains the following Phases:

Phase 1: Preparation Phase - Flip the Scoring tile of the previous round, refill any empty boxes on the Export board and retrieve your Merchants (skip this phase in the first round).
Phase 2: Action Phase - Players take Actions until all players have passed.
Phase 3: Production Phase - Units on the game board produce Goods and Income.
Phase 4: Scoring Phase - Players receive Glory according to the current round's Scoring tile.

At the end of the fifth round, final scores are calculated and the player with the most Victory Points (VP) is the winner.

Phase 1: Preparation
Flip the previous round's Scoring tile face-down. If needed, refill any empty boxes on the Export board with Export contracts (according to player count). Players retrieve their own Merchants from the Market and place them next to their Player boards.

Phase 2: Action
During the Action phase, each player takes exactly one Action per turn, in turn order. Play continues until all players have passed. There are eight possible Actions to choose from, each of which (except for Passing), can be taken multiple times during a round:

1. Trade
2. Obtain an Export Contract
3. Expand
4. Upgrade Shipping
5. Upgrade Technology
6. Hire a Merchant
7. Fulfil an Export Contract
8. Pass

1. Trade
The Merchants that are in your stock, not on your Player board, are ready to be used in a Trade action. You can send these Merchants to the Market to buy or sell Goods. Place as many Merchants on the buy or sell area of a single Good (designated by the up and down arrows respectively) as the quantity of Goods you wish to buy or sell. These Merchants remain on the Market board until retrieved in the subsequent Preparation phase. You then pay/receive the Good's current price multiplied by the number of Goods bought or sold. All trades are made with the common Goods pools. Afterwards, the traded Good's price is adjusted by moving the Price marker according to the arrow of the area (up when buying or down when selling) by as many steps as the number of Goods traded.

Players may only buy or sell one type of Good during a Trade action. In order to trade different types of Goods they must take the Trade action multiple times.

It is prohibited to have Merchants from the same player on both the buy and sell area of the same Good. High-speed trading was not common in 19th-century Scotland!

Example: A player wants to buy two units of Whisky at the current price of £10. They place two Merchants above the up arrow of the Whisky column, pay £20, take two Whisky barrels from the supply, and put them into their stock. The Whisky price then increases by two steps to £12.

2. Obtain an Export Contract
Pay the current round cost to take any Export contract from the Export board and place it on your empty Export box. The cost is determined by the game round and is indicated next to the Scoring tiles on the Export board. Note that in the first round, players receive £5 when obtaining an Export contract rather than paying a cost. You can have only one unfulfilled Export contract on your Export box (exception: Clan Buchanan). You must fulfil your Export contract before obtaining a new one. It is not possible to get rid of unfulfilled Export contracts.

3. Expand
Place one unit (Sheep, Cow, Cheese dairy, Bakery, Field, Distillery, Woodcutter or Miner) from the top of the respective column of your Player board onto any empty space of the map that is neighbouring or within Shipping reach of any of your units. Pay for the costs of the unit (coin with red number above the respective unit) and for the space (coin with red number between £1 and £6).

-4-

Neighbouring: adjacent space with no river in between
Within Shipping reach: a space that you can reach with your current Shipping level
Land Restrictions: Land types only support specific units:
Grasslands: Sheep, Cows, Cheese dairies, Bakeries, Fields and Distilleries
Forests: Woodcutters
Mountains: Miners

If a space contains more than one of these land types, you can place any corresponding unit on it. In the image shown, a player could deploy any unit on this space because it contains all three land types.

Consequently, if you have deployed all your Woodcutters you cannot expand to a space that contains only forest. Likewise, if you have deployed all your Miners you cannot expand to a space that contains only mountain.

Neighbourhood Bonus
If you expand into a space neighbouring another player's unit (adjacent and no river in between), you may immediately perform an additional Trade action and buy the type of Good produced by the neighbouring unit from the common stock. You cannot buy more than three pieces of the same type of Good per turn (four pieces in a 2 player game). The price of Basic goods (Wool, Grain, Milk) is reduced by £2.
The price of Processed goods (Bread, Cheese, Whisky) is reduced by £3.

Proceed with the purchase as explained under the Trade action (see page 4). You need to have the appropriate number of Merchants available to use this bonus.
Prices are adjusted the same way as in the Trade action.

If you expand into a space neighbouring several opponent spaces with units deployed, you may use the Neighbourhood bonus for each of these units. You cannot buy more than three pieces of the same type of Good per turn, (four pieces in a 2 player game) even when expanding into a space neighbouring two identical units.

The Neighbourhood bonus can only be used immediately after expanding.

Example: If a player expands into a space neighbouring another player's Distillery, they may buy Whisky. If the current Whisky price is £10, then they could buy three Whisky (or four in a 2 player game) from the general supply at £7 each by placing the appropriate number of their Merchants on the Whisky's up arrow. If there was also an opponent's Cheese dairy neighbouring the space they expanded into, that current player could also buy up to three Cheese at a discount (or four in a 2 player game) if they had sufficient Merchants to do so.

Building Bonus
If you deploy your fourth building of one type onto the map (Cheese dairy, Bakery or Distillery) AND your Export box is empty, you may immediately draw three Export contracts from the draw pile. Take either one or none of the Export contracts, and the unselected Export contracts are returned to the bottom of the draw pile. If you take an Export contract you pay the costs as if you performed the action Obtain an Export Contract. This bonus is still considered part of the Expand action.

4. Upgrade Shipping
Pay £4 to move your Shipping marker forward one space to increase your Shipping reach.
Doing so allows you to expand across rivers and lochs.
Regardless of Shipping level, a player may never hop across a land space, not even along a river.

Shipping Levels:
No shipping: You cannot expand across any type of water.
River-crossing: You can now expand directly across a river to an adjacent space.
1-loch: Alternatively to river-crossing, you may now expand across one loch space instead.
2-loch: Alternatively to river-crossing, you may now expand across two loch spaces instead etc.

Example: Consider the red player: with no upgraded Shipping, red can only expand to spaces marked [1]; with River-crossing shipping red can also expand to spaces marked [2]; with 1-loch shipping red can also expand to the space marked [3].
Red cannot expand to the spaces marked with [X], no matter the Shipping level, because a player can only cross rivers to adjacent spaces-a player cannot expand by leaping over land spaces (not even along a river).

When trying to apply the Neighbourhood bonus, the space marked [*] is neighbouring the blue Cheese dairy. The top space marked [2] is adjacent to the blue Cheese dairy but because there is a river in between, it is still not neighbouring.

-5-

5. Upgrade Technology

Players can increase the income from their Workers (Woodcutters and Miners) by upgrading their equipment.
Upgraded Workers produce £2 more in the Production Phase of each round. To upgrade a Worker technology, pay £10 and flip over the corresponding Technology tile on your Player board.

If you receive a Bonus Upgrade (see Direct Export Bonuses below) and you choose the Technology upgrade action you pay £5 instead of £10.

6. Hire a Merchant

Players start with two Merchants in their stock. To hire a new Merchant, pay £4 and take an additional Merchant from your Player board and add it to your stock. From now on, you may use this Merchant for future Trade actions.

7. Fulfil an Export Contract

To fulfil an Export contract that is on your Export box, pay the Goods listed on the left half of the Export contract tile.
Then you receive the benefits shown on the right half of the tile. These benefits include Import goods such as Hops, Cotton, Tobacco or Sugar cane and Direct export bonuses. When a player fulfils an Export contract with the import goods Cotton, Tobacco or Sugar cane, they move the respective token on the Export board track by as many steps as the amount imported. If the token reaches or passes a marked step (see image on the right side), the player gains £1 (if they forget to move the import token at the point of fulfilling an Export contract, they do not get the bonus afterwards!). As soon as the player has fulfilled an Export contract, they place the Export contract tile face-up next to their Export box, which is open again for a new Export contract.

Export contracts never require Grain or Milk but may require any combination of the other goods.

Export contracts that require Meat (Beef or Mutton) can only be fulfilled by slaughtering Cows or Sheep.
A player slaughters their animals, as part of the Fulfil an Export Contract action, by removing the animal from the map and placing it back onto their Player board. Note that this will reduce their Milk or Wool production. It will also free the space where the animal was and any player will be able to expand there, subject to the normal expansion rules.
Slaughtering is only allowed to fulfil an Export contract and does not require a separate turn.

Direct Export Bonuses

There are three Direct export bonuses that players can take in any order to gain an immediate advantage:

Money, taken immediately from the supply.

Free space, which allows the player to immediately take an Expand action without paying the land cost of the space into which they expand. The player must still pay the unit cost, and all rules for expanding and Neighbourhood bonuses apply.

Bonus Upgrade action-choose one of the following Actions:
- A Technology upgrade action for the discounted price of £5,
- A Shipping upgrade action at no cost,
- Hire a Merchant from the Player board at no cost. Alternatively, the player may take one of their Merchants back from the Market into their stock instead of hiring a new one.

If a player obtains multiple Bonus upgrade actions they can choose the same or different upgrades.

8. Pass
On your turn, if you cannot or do not want to take any more Actions, you must Pass and stop taking Actions for the remainder of this round. After Passing, move your Turn order token to the leftmost available position of the next round and receive the Pass bonus money indicated (even in the last round). The order in which players pass determines the turn order for the next round.

Free Action: Using a Port bonus tile
If a Port bonus tile is neighbouring, or within Shipping reach of, any of a player's units, that player may use the corresponding Port bonus in addition to whatever Action they perform on their turn (a Port bonus tile can be used before or after the player's main Action). A player can use the Port bonus immediately or in any future turn (as long as the player's unit is neighbouring or within shipping reach).
Once you use the Port bonus, put a Port bonus marker of your colour next to the used Port bonus tile to indicate you have used it. Each player can use each Port bonus tile only once in the game (several players can use the same Port bonus tile, though). A player may use multiple Port bonus tiles in one turn (see the Appendix).

Example: The black player passed first, received £16, and will be first in turn order for the next round.

Example: The black player can use the Port bonus no matter their Shipping level because black has a unit neighbouring the Port bonus tile. The red player can also use the Port bonus if red's Shipping reach is 2-loch or higher.

-6-

Phase 3: Production

During the Production phase players receive Income and produce Goods from units that are deployed on the map. The amount of money and Goods produced in this phase is indicated by the empty slots on the Player board from which the units have been removed and that now show the Income icon [+].

The Production phase follows this order:

Each deployed Worker earns you money (each Worker below the first displays the total income for your convenience):
- Each Woodcutter earns £4 (£6 with the Technology upgrade). [?]-> £4 (£6 with upgrade)
- Each Miner earns £6 (£8 with the Technology upgrade). [?] => £6 (£8 with upgrade)

Produce Basic goods:
- Each Sheep produces one Wool.
- Each Cow produces one Milk.
- Each Field produces two Grain.

Produce Processed goods (optional):
- Each Cheese dairy may process one Milk into one Cheese.
- Each Bakery may process one Grain into one Bread.
- Each Distillery may process one Grain into one Whisky.

The Basic goods spent to produce the Processed goods can come from anywhere: including received during the current Production phase, a previous Production phase, purchased from the Market on a previous turn, etc.

Hint: It is recommended that players store their current Goods and money below their Player boards and put the Goods they just produced above their Player board so players can check if they took the correct amount of Goods.

Hint: Once players are familiar with how the Production phase works they can collect their Income after Passing to speed up the game.

Phase 4: Scoring

In this phase players earn the Glory bonus indicated on the bottom half of the current Scoring tile, if they have fulfilled the requirement in the top half. Glory is tracked by moving the Glory tokens on the track on the Export board (take or flip a Glory marker when you complete a lap). Each Scoring tile is explained in the Appendix.

Final Scoring

Final Scoring takes place after five rounds are completed. Fill in the VP for each player on the Scoresheet.
The player with the most VP is proclaimed the greatest Clan Chief of Caledonia and wins the game!

Glory: 1 VP for each step on the Glory track.
Basic goods: 1 VP for each Basic Good in your stock.
Processed goods: 2VP for each Processed good in your stock.
Money: 1 VP for every £10. Leftover money breaks ties on the final score.
Hops: 1 VP for each Hops imported listed on your fulfilled Export contracts. 
Cotton, Tobacco and Sugar cane: 3, 4 or 5VP each according to their rarity. (The rarest Imported Good is the most valuable one!) The Import token that was moved the furthest along the track (because it was imported the most by all players) is the most common Imported Good and is worth 3 VP each, the second most Imported Good is worth 4 VP each and the least Imported Good is worth 5VP each. If there is a tie regarding the amount of Imported Goods, Cotton is the rarest, followed by Tobacco, then Sugar cane. Players receive points for the number of Imported Goods listed on their fulfilled Export contracts multiplied by the respective VP.

Export Scoring

Each player counts the number of their fulfilled Export contracts and gains VP as follows:
3 or 4 players: 12VP for the player with the most fulfilled Export contracts, 6VP for the player with the second most.
Game with 2 players: 8VP for the player with the most fulfilled Export contracts only.

In case of a tie, evenly divide the VP of the respective tiers among the tied players (round down if necessary).

Example: Tobacco was imported the least and Cotton the most. Thus, each unit of Tobacco is worth 5VP, each Sugar cane is worth 4VP and each Cotton is worth 3VP. You have imported three Tobacco, two Sugar cane and six Cotton. So you earn 5 × 3 = 15VP for your Tobacco, 4 × 2 = 8VP for your Sugar cane, and 3 × 6 = 18VP for your Cotton.

Example: In a 3 player game, there is a tie between two players for first rank. They equally share points for the first two ranks (12VP + 6VP = 18VP), so they both receive 9VP. The third player does not gain any VP. In a 2 player game, each tied player receives 4VP.

-7-

Settlement Scoring

Each player counts the number of their Settlements within Shipping reach of each other. A Settlement is defined as a cluster of neighbouring units of one colour (adjacent and no river in between). Single units that are not neighbouring to any other unit of the same colour are also considered Settlements. If not all of your Settlements are within Shipping reach of each other, the biggest group of Settlements within Shipping reach of each other counts in this scoring.

3-4 players: The player with the most Settlements within Shipping reach: 18VP; second-most: 12VP; third-most: 6VP.
2 players: The player with the most Settlements within Shipping reach: 12VP; second-most: 0VP.

Tied players share the points the same way as in the Export scoring.

This scoring is NOT about having expanded to the most spaces, nor is it about having built the biggest settlement!

Example: If the red player has 1-loch Shipping level, red has only three Settlements within Shipping reach.
If the black player has 2-loch Shipping level, the black player has five Settlements within Shipping reach.

The three encircled red units are a single Settlement because they are neighbouring each other. All other red units are single-unit Settlements. The two red units at the top are two Settlements because they are separated by a river. Red has four Settlements in total. However, the Settlement at the very bottom left is two loch spaces away from the three-unit Settlement and thus not within Shipping reach of any of the red Settlements. Nevertheless, this is enough to connect the Settlement with three units to the two single Settlements at the top, since 1-loch Shipping is sufficient for red to cross the one loch space in between. Therefore, only three of the red player's four Settlements are within Shipping reach and count towards the Settlement scoring.

Hint: Slaughtering your animals can be beneficial or detrimental for this scoring. You can create more Settlements by slaughtering (splitting one bigger Settlement into two smaller Settlements) or harm your scoring because some Settlements might not longer be within Shipping reach.

Note: If desired, starting in the fourth or fifth round of the game, you can start to track the number of settlements within shipping range per player on the Export board track using the Settlement tokens.

2 Player Game

In the 2 player game you play on a smaller map. The shaded land spaces at the edge (additionally marked by mist) are not part of the active map and so players cannot expand into them. The non-shaded spaces adjacent to the shaded spaces are the border spaces of the active map. This is relevant for Scoring tile #5 and Clan Fergusson. All loch spaces are part of the active map.

Solo Game

In this variant you try to achieve the highest possible score. You play with the same smaller map as in the 2 player game. Use Workers of different player colours to act as neutral pieces and put them on all spaces of the active map that have a cost of £1. All these spaces will be unavailable for you for the whole game. In a solo game you cannot take a Neighbourhood bonus.

Randomly draw and place five Export contracts face-up on the Export board before you start the game.
Each time you pass you receive a Passing bonus of £16.

Market Dice
Goods die: Wool, Grain, Milk, Bread, Cheese, Whisky
Price die: -3, -2, -1, +1, +2, +3

Additional Phase: Market Phase

At the beginning of rounds 2-5 during the Preparation phase and after Merchants were retrieved, the prices of three randomly chosen Goods are changed once each. Roll the Goods and the Price dice. The Goods die shows the price of which Good is changed. Reroll the Goods die if it shows a Good whose price was already changed in this phase.

Check whether the price of this Good is below (low prices) or above (high prices) the brackets on the Market. The brackets next to the Market indicate the medium range. Prices above are high, and those below are low.

When the price is low or high then you ignore the algebraic symbol (- or +).
When the price is low then the price increases by the absolute value of the Price die.
When the price is high then the price decreases by the absolute value of the Price die.
When the price is in the medium range, then the price changes exactly according to the Price die. A '-3' will cause the price to decrease by three steps. A '+1' will increase the price by one step.

Example: When the current price is low and the Price die shows -3 or +3, the price increases by three steps.

-8-

Refill Export Contracts

Fill all empty slots on the Export board with new Export contracts from the draw pile. Your last Price die roll shows which of the six Export contracts gets removed. Find the intersection of the algebraic symbol and the numeral on the Export board and remove that Export contract from the game. Each Action phase starts with five Export contracts.

Export Scoring:
Fulfilled Export contracts: 7 or more -> 12VP
Fulfilled Export contracts: 6 -> 8VP
Fulfilled Export contracts: 5 -> 4VP

Settlement Scoring:
14 or more connected Settlements -> 18VP
11-13 connected Settlements -> 12VP
8-10 connected Settlements -> 6VP

Result:
0-115VP: Newbie
116-130VP: Rookie
131-145VP: Average
146-160VP: Expert
161+ VP: Genius!

Example: A '-3' refers to the slot on the very bottom left.

Variants

These variants can be played in any combination.

Simplifications
The following simplifications are good for your first game.

Static Import Goods
If players dislike even small amounts of luck in the game, they can choose this variant. No matter how much Cotton, Tobacco or Sugar cane was imported, each is worth 4 VP each at the end of the game. Thus, there is no need to track Imported goods on the Export board.

Without Scoring and/or Port Tiles
Players can simplify the game by ignoring the Scoring tiles and/or the Port tiles during setup and play.

Tighter Game Map
If players prefer a tighter game map, they can agree to use the backsides of four spare Port tiles to cover any four land spaces of the active map during setup in a 2-3 player game, preferably one tile per module (the map in a 4 player game is already quite tight). These spaces are not available for the Expand action.

Without Clans
If players prefer more symmetric starting conditions they can ignore the clans during setup and play. In addition to the Goods and money on the chosen Starting tiles, players receive:
Starting player £0, second player £2, third player £4 and fourth player £6.

Clan Auction
(Recommended only for experienced Clan Chiefs!)
If the players play very competitively, they may want to auction the clans. If so, they apply the following auction mechanism:

Randomly draw as many Clan tiles as the number of players and allocate each Clan tile a random Starting tile. Randomly determine a player who bids any number of VP (or 0) to be able to choose a clan first. The player to their left can bid any higher amount of VP and so on until there is a winning bid that no player wants to outbid (30VP is the highest possible bid). If a player does not want to bid higher, the respective player cannot bid again this auction round. The player with the winning bid writes down their bid as negative VPs on the Scoresheet, places their token on the first space of the Turn order track and takes the Clan tile along with the corresponding Starting tile.
The player to their left bids for one of the remaining clans and so on until the second clan is chosen by the player with the winning bid, who then is second on the Turn order track etc. The last player without a clan is given the remaining Clan tile and Starting tile without losing any VP and is designated last in turn order.

You can find more variants at www.karma-games.com/clans-variants

Imprint
Game designer: Juma Al-JouJou
Publisher: Karma Games
Illustrator: Klemens Franz | atelier198
Typesetting: Andrea Kattnig | atelier198
Dan Cunningham
Karma Games
Juma Al-JouJou
Manfred-von-Richthofen-Strasse 13
12101 Berlin
Germany
www.karma-games.com

-9-

Appendix

Port Bonus Tiles

Use this bonus in a turn when you fulfil an Export contract requiring Meat. The fulfilled Export contract requires 1 fewer slaughtered animals.
Discard one Basic good of your choice and gain any three Basic goods of your choice (including the type you discarded).
Discard one Processed good of your choice and gain any two Processed goods of your choice (including the type you discarded).
Receive one Bonus upgrade (see page 6) and gain 3 Glory.
Gain £10.
Manipulate the price of one Good by three steps on the Market before trading this Good.
Take any two of your units from your Player board (other than Fields) and exchange them with any two of your units on the map (other than Fields) at no cost. The two new units must be different from the two old units. The new units must match the land type on which they are deployed. If you qualify you can obtain the Building bonus. You cannot obtain any Neighbourhood bonus during this port action.
You gain £5. If your Export box is empty you can perform the Building bonus (and pay the respective costs if you decide to take an Export contract, as normal).
Pay £3, put a Port bonus marker on this tile, and then use any one of the other three Port tiles in play. Due to this Port tile, you can potentially use another port tile's effect twice.

Scoring Tiles
Gain 1 Glory for each Basic good in your stock.
Gain 3 Glory for each two Processed goods in your stock.
Gain 1 Glory for each of your deployed Sheep, Cows, Cheese dairies, Bakeries and Distilleries and 2 Glory for each Field.
Gain 2 Glory for each of your deployed Workers (including Fishermen if you are Clan MacDonald).
Gain 3 Glory for every two units on border spaces of the active map. In a game with 1-2 players, the shaded spaces (also marked with mist) are not part of the active map, thus all the spaces adjacent to the shaded spaces with mist are considered border spaces.
Gain 1 Glory for each unit of Cotton, Tobacco and Sugar cane on your fulfilled Export contracts.
Gain 2 Glory for each unit of Meat on your fulfilled Export contracts.
Gain 1 Glory for each of your Upgrades (Technology upgrades, Shipping upgrades and hired Merchants). Just count each spot left of your Shipping marker, each free Merchant spot and each upgraded (flipped) Technology tile. You also gain Glory for Upgrades your clan started with.
Gain 2 Glory for each of your occupied spaces with the cost of £5 or £6.

-10-

Clans

Scotclans.com was invaluable for our research. They allowed us to use the clan crests, thank you!

Clan Buchanan

Several members of this clan were prosperous 'Tobacco Lords' in Glasgow. Most of their tobacco imports from the United States were immediately re-exported to mainland Europe. Buchanan Street is one of the main shopping streets in Glasgow and was named after a wealthy Tobacco Lord, Andrew Buchanan, who owned the land it was originally built on.

You have an additional Export box and can thus obtain one or two Export contracts in one turn. If you obtain just one Export contract per turn, you pay the regular cost of the current round. However, if you obtain two Export contracts in one turn (no matter how), you pay the cost only once instead of twice. If you are given the Building bonus, you draw six instead of three Export contracts and you can select 0-2 Export contracts (this also applies to Port bonus tile #8).

Fulfil an Export contract action: You can fulfil up to two Export contracts per turn.

In the first round: If you obtain two Export contracts in a single turn, you receive the +£5 bonus only once. However, during each turn in which you obtain an Export contract you gain the £5; so you can obtain an Export contract in one turn and gain £5, then obtain an additional Export contract in another turn and again gain £5-even if the first Export contract has not yet been fulfilled.

Strategy: Because taking two Export contracts in one turn in later rounds is a lot cheaper for you, you want to focus on smaller Export contracts and fulfil most in the last two rounds.

Example: If you take two Export contracts in a single turn in the 5th round, you pay only £15 instead of £30.

Clan Campbell

Colen Campbell was a pioneering Scottish architect and architectural writer, credited as a founder of the Georgian style.

You get better at building factories of Processed goods the more often you build them. The first factory of each type is £3 cheaper, the second and third factory of each type is £4 cheaper and the fourth factory of each type is £5 cheaper. So you have an incentive to specialise in producing a lot of Processed goods.

Strategy: Produce a lot of one type of Processed good that is in high demand Export contracts. Selling your Processed goods is a good source of income too.
Example: If you build three Bakeries and one Distillery, in the first Bakery costs £8 - £3 = £5, the 2nd and the 3rd Bakeries cost £8 - £4 = £4. The Distillery is £3 cheaper and costs £10 - £3 = £7.

Clan Cunningham

Cunninghame is the northern part of Ayrshire, one of the most agriculturally fertile regions of Scotland where raising cattle has traditionally been important. 'Cuinneag' is Gaelic for milk pail and 'ham' means village in Old English.

You produce butter out of Milk. At the end of the Production phase, you may discard any number of Milk tokens in your stock (no merchants needed). For each Milk token you discard, gain £8. Do not adjust the Milk price.

Strategy: Produce as much Milk as possible and buy some if the price is low. Avoid producing Cheese as it consumes your precious Milk!

Clan Fergusson

Clan Fergusson was historically widespread in Scotland which was rather unusual. They have spread across Scotland from as far as Ross-shire in the north to Dumfriesshire in the south.

Placing initial Workers: You start with three starting Workers (for which you still must fully pay). In addition you start with 2-loch Shipping level for free in a 3-4 player game (1-loch Shipping in a 1-2 player game).

You place your third Worker after all other players have placed theirs. You must place all three starting Workers on border spaces of the active map, but they do not need to be adjacent to each other. You must still pay for all three workers and the land costs.

Strategy: Use your Shipping reach and Port bonus tiles!

Clan MacDonald

Clan MacDonald is a Highland clan and one of the largest Scottish clans. Their district was the Inner Hebrides, an archipelago off the west coast of mainland Scotland. Their clan motto is per mare per terras ('by sea and by land'). The chiefs of the clan held the title 'Lord of the Isles'.

Your smaller Clan tile is used for the clan draft and your bigger Clan tile is put on top of the Miner/Woodcutter area of your Player board. Your Technology area remains empty because you cannot perform the Technology upgrade action.

-11-

(Clan MacDonald continued)

You have three abilities:
1) You can use all of your Workers either as Woodcutters, Miners or as Fishermen (even when placing the first workers); all your Workers cost £6 and provide £4 income. Fishermen can be placed on or moved to all empty loch spaces and Port bonus tiles, even in a 1-2 player game. There are no land costs on loch placements. Two Fishermen may never be adjacent to each other (otherwise you deplete the natural resources).
2) Once per turn, you can move a Fisherman to an adjacent loch space by rowing but only before your main Action.
3) In 1-2 player games, you start with river-crossing Shipping for free.

You still need the appropriate Shipping reach to expand across loch spaces. Land spaces adjacent to Fishermen are considered to be neighbouring and thus accessible in the Expand action even without any Shipping reach. The Neighbourhood bonus can be taken advantage of when deploying a Fisherman as well, but not when rowing.

Strategy: Use your rowing ability to increase your reach and for your Settlement scoring.

Clan MacEwan

William McEwan opened the Fountain Brewery in Fountainbridge, Edinburgh, in 1856.
McEwan's is well known for 80/-, a Heavy beer, that was first brewed in the late 19th century and is still sold today.

Your clan ability centers around brewing beer, for which you need hops and grain. Each time you fulfil an Export contract which gives you Hops, you may immediately discard up to 1 Grain for each unit of Hops on the Export contract. You gain £9 for each unit of Grain discarded. You can discard a maximum of 3 Grain per Export contract. You can gain at maximum £27 from your clan ability per Export contract. You can choose to use your clan ability before or after taking any Direct export bonuses.

Strategy: Take Export contracts that give you Hops and that are easy to fulfill. Produce grain early on.

Clan MacKenzie

Clan MacKenzie bought the Dalmore Distillery, one of the oldest distilleries in Scotland, in 1867. The award winning distillery is still running and is known for its very exclusive whiskies.
In the Production phase you gain £3 for each unit of Whisky you produce (because it is so good!). You do not have to discard any Whisky to get this money.

Furthermore, you have a cellar. At the beginning of each Production phase, Whisky barrels already in the cellar age and are moved one spot to the right. The Whisky barrel starting a Production phase in the rightmost space of the cellar is placed into your stock. You can move any Whisky barrel from the cellar into your stock at any time. When you move aged Whisky out of the cellar into your stock, you gain £7 or £15 respectively.

At the end of each Production phase you may then put one freshly-produced Whisky barrel in the cellar on the left spot so it can age in later Production phases. For the purposes of Scoring tile #2, Whisky in the cellar does score.

Strategy: As long as the Whisky price is medium or high, selling Whisky provides you with a lot of money to reinvest. When the Whisky price drops, ageing the Whisky and/or exporting it is better.

Clan Robertson

Clan Robertson is one of the oldest clans of Scotland. Their clan district is called 'Struan' and lies at the confluence of the Errochty Water and Garry rivers. The district name is derived from the Gaelic word 'Sruthan', which means 'streams'.

Each time you place a unit in a river delta (a space that is adjacent to a river just flowing into a loch) you pay £3 less (£2 less in games with 1-2 players) off the total cost. This applies to placing your initial two Workers as well.

Strategy: You obviously want to start at or near to river deltas and expand as much into river delta spaces as possible. Slaughtering livestock on river deltas allows you to expand on river deltas more often.
Example: In a 4 player game, you build a Bakery (cost £8) on a river delta spaces river delta space with cost £1. The final cost is £8 + £1 - £3 = £6.

Clan Stewart

Clan Stewart is a Highland clan. It produced powerful monarchs such as Mary Stuart and Queen Anne.

You start with three additional Merchants (five total) and river-crossing Shipping level for free.
Furthermore, each time you trade one or multiple units of a type of Good at the Market you gain a bonus of £1. If you buy Goods, you receive the bonus of £1 before paying. If you use the Neighbourhood bonus and buy multiple types of Goods in one turn, you gain £1 for each type of Good you are buying.

Strategy: Try to fully use the market and the Neighbourhood bonus in particular.
Example: If you buy 3 Milk and 3 Whisky through the Neighbourhood bonus, you receive £1 for each type of Good, so £2 in total.

-12-

www.karma-games.com/clans-variants

Variants of Clans of Caledonia

In addition to the variants mentioned in the rulebook, you can try the following variants:

Balanced Scoring of Import Goods per Player

If you dislike both the standard scoring of the Import goods and the simplified version where all import goods score 4 VP each, then you can try this variant:
At the end of the game, every player receives 5 VP for each unit of the import good the respective player has imported the least, 3 VP each for the import good that the respective player has imported the most and 4 VP each for the third import good. Please note that each player only looks at the amounts she/he imported individually. Thus, you do not track the amount of import goods on the export board.
Advantage: This scoring is less swingy than the standard scoring but offers a bit more depth than the simplified scoring.
Disadvantage: This scoring removes uncertainty which can also help players who are behind and it reduces the interaction.

Three Future Export Contracts Face-Up

The draw of new export contracts at the beginning of a round is pretty much the only random element in this game. If you dislike even the slightiest element of chance in strategy games then you might want to consider doing the following:
After having refilled the export board with contracts at the beginning of a round, draw three further export contracts from the the top of the draw pile and put them face-up next to the export board. Next round you will first use these face-up contracts to refill the export board. These three contracts are not available yet for the action "Take export contracts". However, this allows you to look into the future and thus reduces the uncertainty. So let's call these three contracts "future export contracts"
When you do receive the building bonus, you choose one of the future export contracts next to the player board and remove the remaining two from the game. Then, draw another three contracts from the draw pile and put them face-up next to the export board again.
Clan Buchanan, building bonus: You would draw three additional export contracts from the draw pile and put them face-up next to the three future export contracts. You can then choose 1-2 export contracts from the six future export contracts. If you also choose "Take export contracts" as your main action, you could choose to take 1-2 export contracts from either/or or both the export board and the six face-up future export contracts. The future export contracts that were not chosen would then be removed from the game and three new future export contracts would be drawn and put face-up next to the export board.
Advantage: Less uncertainty, more strategy
Disadvantage: Fiddlier, higher risk for analysis paralysis

Most Glory Scoring

If you wish the glory scoring were a bit more important, grant the player with most glory (not VP) at the end of the game, an additional 6 glory. In case of a tie, share points the same way as in the other scorings.
Advantage: more important round scorings, more interaction
Disadvantage: slightly more complex scoring at the end

More simplifying variants

You can leave out all or any number of the following elements:
- scoring tiles
- most export contracts scoring
- settlement scoring
The 1 coin bonus for passing the import good icons on the export track can also be left out, especially if you do not have any problem remembering to move the import goods tokens (unless you play the respective simplified variant, then you do not track import goods anyway).

Clan Distribution by Player Experience

While I am convinced that all clans grant a fair fighting chance to experienced players, some clans are certainly more newbie friendly than others.
If some in your playgroup are just learning the game or are less experienced with strategy games, you might want to consider to give the more straightforward clans to the less experienced players and the more challenging clans to the experienced players.

Newbie friendly clans: Cunningham, Fergusson, Campbell
More challenging clans: Buchanan, MacEwen, MacDonald
Advantage: more even chances for less experienced players and more challenging for experienced players

Do you have more ideas for a good variant? Or do you have any feedback for these variants? Feel free to email me!
