This book has two parts, the Rulebook and the Scenario Book. The Rulebook provides the complete rules for playing the Mage Knight Board Game. We strongly recommend that players start by reading the Game Walkthrough, where the rules Table of Contents are explained in a more natural order, with many pictures and examples.

Once you have read the Game Walkthrough and played your fi rst scenario, and are familiar with the game components and RULEBOOK

concept, this Rulebook provides the complete rules for the game, except the rules relating to certain scenarios (those you Game Flow ......................................................................................................1

can fi nd in the Scenario Book) and rules for particular map sites (those you can fi nd on the Site Description cards).

Game Setup for the Full Game ..................................................................3

This is a complex game, and even after you play your fi rst couple of games, you may still need to check the rules from time to One Round of the Game (Day or Night) ................................................4

time. For a smoother experience, we recommend this approach:

Basic Game Concepts ..................................................................................4

• When playing, have the Site Description cards for all sites nearby. Each Site Description card provides all the rules for the A Player’s Turn ................................................................................................6

given map site. It may use terms that are further explained in the Rulebook.

Movement .......................................................................................................7

• When playing, have the last page of this book within reach. It provides a useful summary of game phases and a table of Interacting with Locals ................................................................................8





combat abilities.


Combat with Enemies ..................................................................................8

• For scenario related rules (setup, special rules, end game conditions, scoring), consult the description of the given End of the Turn .............................................................................................11

scenario in the Scenario Book. It may also refer to some more common scenario rules (like the dummy player or scoring); Wounds and Healing .................................................................................11

these are at the start of the Scenario Book.

Player versus Player Combat ...................................................................12

• If you want to check some generic rule (not related to a particular map site or scenario), use the Rulebook. It is organized Cooperative City Assault ..........................................................................13

in systematic way, and once you understand its structure, you will be able to navigate through it more easily. When searching for a particular rule or situation, consult the Table of Contents on this page to fi nd which phase of the game the SCENARIO BOOK

rule belongs. If it does not relate to a particular phase of the game, it will be probably in the Basic Game Concepts section.

General Principles .......................................................................................14

• The same applies if you are searching for more details of a site related rule (for example, to see how a mage tower aff ects Variants ..........................................................................................................16

movement, search in the Movement section). The Rulebook refers to sites by text written like this. Note that sites may Scenario List ..................................................................................................18

share some rules according to their type (fortifi ed sites, adventure sites and rampaging enemies).

• Do not try to look up rules in the Game Walkthrough. You should be able to fi nd all the rules in this book or on a Site SUMMARY

Description card. If you have found the rule here but you are not sure how to interpret it, you may try to fi nd its more detailed explanation in the Game Walkthrough.

Summary ......................................................................................................23

Icon Reference .............................................................................................24

Turn Sequence Overview .........................................................................24

1. Choose a scenario – Pick a scenario from the Scenario Book

• When a player takes their Hero, they put that Hero’s Round

3. Setup the Game – Fol ow the directions in the “Game Setup”

to play. You may also use any variant rules as long as all players

Order token on the table. Round Order tokens should be

section on the next page to set up the game area. Check the

agree to them.

placed sequential y in a column, such that the Round Order

scenario description for any exceptions or special rules that

2. Player Order/Hero Selection – Determine an order for players

token for the player that picked fi rst is at the top of the

may modify the game setup.

to make their Hero selection. In that order, each player chooses

column, while the token for the player that picked last is at

4. Play the Game – Play out the Rounds of the game until you

one of the available Heroes and takes all of the associated Hero

the bot om.

fulfi ll the end-game conditions outlined in the scenario, or until

components.

you reach the Round limit.

5. Outcome of the Game – When the game is over, fol ow the

scoring rules outlined in the scenario.

1





Advanced Action deck

Spel deck

Wound pile

Artifact deck

Enemy and Ruin token piles

City cards and

City fi gures

Spaces for

Reputat

Advanced

Fame track

ion trac

Spaces for

k

Action off er

Spell off er

Tile deck

Spaces for

Common Skil

off er

Fame and Reputation board

Elite Unit deck

Regular Unit deck

Source

Round

Order

Move costs

Unused Night

Tactics





Site Description and


Day/Night board

Scoring cards

Spaces for

Space to display

Unit off er





Advanced Action cards


later (for Monasteries)

Mana die

Bank

Map

Mana

crystals

Tiles revealed





at start


Map shape when starting tile B

is used.





Displayed Day Tactics


2





• Fame and Reputation board. Players put one of their Shield

• Unit off er. Reveal as many cards from the Regular (silver) Unit

• Tile deck. The Scenario description says how many tiles of

tokens on the 0 space of the Fame track and one on the central

deck as there are actual players plus 2. Later, there may also

each type you should use to form this deck.

0 space of the Reputation track.

be some Advanced Action cards in the Unit off er (one for each

– For Countryside tiles (green back), pick them randomly.

• Enemy and Ruin token piles. Sort the enemy (round) and ruin

monastery on the map).

– For Core tiles (brown back), separate them into city and

(hexagonal) tokens by the reverse side, and stack them in seven

• Round Order tokens. Each player puts their Round Order

non-city tiles (according to whether they have a City icon in

face down piles. Next to each pile, there is a space for discarded

token here, with the player who picked their Hero fi rst being at

the middle). Then randomly choose the appropriate number

tokens. If you run out of tokens, reshuffl e the discarded ones

the top.

of non-city and city tiles.

and create a new face down pile.

• Day/Night board. At the start of the game, put it day side up.

– To form the deck, shuffl e the chosen brown tiles together,

• Artifact deck. Shuffl e the Artifacts and put them in a face

At the start of a new round, it gets fl ipped, so Day and Night

then put the shuffl ed green tiles on top of them.

down deck. Artifacts are never displayed in an off er.

alternate.

• Map. According to the scenario description, put the starting tile

• Wound pile. Al Wound cards are the same. Stack them in a

– The left part of this board depicts the Move costs of various

either A side or B side up.

face up pile.

ter ains.

– Reveal two (if using starting tile A) or three (if using B) tiles

• Spells deck and Spell off er. Shuffl e the Spell cards and put

– The right part is the Source. Roll as many mana dice as there

from the Tile deck and place them as depicted. Orient the

them in a face down deck. Reveal the fi rst three as the off er.

are actual players plus 2, and place them there. At least

tiles in the same direction as the starting tile.

• Advanced Action deck and Advanced Action off er. Prepare

half of the dice have to show basic colors (red, blue, white

– For all revealed sites, check the Site Description card to see

in the same way as for Spells.

or green). If not, keep rerol ing all the black and gold dice

what happens when they are revealed.

• Common Skill off er. An empty area where Skill tokens not

together until this is true.

• Site Description cards and Scoring card. These should be

chosen during Level up will be put.

• Displayed Day Tactics. Display the Day Tactic cards in an

nearby, so players can easily take and read them.

• Regular Unit deck and Elite Unit deck. Shuffl e the Unit cards

easily accessible place.

• City cards and City fi gures. These can be out of reach, as you

with silver and gold backs separately to create two face down

• Unused Tactics. Put the Night Tactic cards here now. You do

will not need them until later in the game.

decks.

not need to shuffl e them.

• Bank. Put the mana crystals in an accessible space. Place any

unused mana dice there, as sometimes you may need to roll a

die during the game.

• Hero card. This card represents your character. In its lower part

• Deed Deck. Each player shuffl es the 16 Basic Action cards of

• Pile of Skill tokens. Each player has 11 Skill tokens in their

is the Inventory, in which you store crystals gained during the

their Hero (check the symbol in upper right corner) to create

color. If you are playing a cooperative game then remove the

game.

their Deed deck.

competitive interactive skil . If you are playing a

• Pile of Level tokens. Stack the fi ve octagonal Level tokens in a

• Player’s hand. At the start of the game, draw 5 cards from your

competitive game then remove the cooperative interactive

face up pile, sorted by numbers, so the one marked 1-2 is at the

Deed deck (according to your Hand limit depicted on your

skil . Randomize the 10 remaining skil s and put them in a

top, while 9-10 is at the bot om. The cur ent token shows your

topmost Level token).

face down pile.

Armor of 2 and Hand limit of 5 for levels 1-2. Put the sixth blank

• Discard pile. Here you discard played cards at the end of your

• Gained Skills. An area where Skill tokens gained during Level

Level token shield side up in your Unit area as a Command

turn (and sometimes also some cards during your turn).

up will be put.

token.

• Figure. For now, place your fi gure here. It will move to the map

• Skill Description card. All Skill tokens belonging to your Hero

• Unit Area. Here you place your recruited Units. Each Unit needs

during your fi rst turn.

are described here.

its own Command token. You cur ently have one Command

• Play Area. Each player should have some reasonable space in

token, so you can only have one Unit. When advancing to an

• Shield tokens. Use one on the Fame track and another on the

front of them, where they can play cards during their turn.

odd-numbered level, you get another Command token, so your

Reputation track. The rest are used to mark your successes on

maximum number of Units increases.

the map. The supply should be endless (if you run out of them,

use a substitute).

Hero card

Gained

Skills

Pile of Level

tokens

Play Area

Shield

Inventory

tokens

Deed deck

Command

token

Hero fi gure

Unit area





Discard pile


(face up)

Pile of Skill

tokens

Skill

Description





card


Player’s hand

3





1. Rounds are either Day or Night. Players take their turns within

e. Refresh the Spell off er – Fol ow the same steps as for

c. Rear ange the Round Order tokens according to the Tactic

a Round.

refreshing the Advanced Action off er.

number of each player, such that the lowest Tactic number is

2. Prepare the Round (skip this step for the fi rst Round of the

f. Col ect Tactic cards – Col ect all Tactic cards from the

on top (fi rst) and the highest Tactic number is on the bot om

game, as it was completed during setup):

previous Round, then display the appropriate set of Tactic

(last).

a. Flip the Day/Night Board – If it was Day, fl ip the board to

cards in the game area, face up.

d. Remove any unclaimed Tactics and set them aside.

Night; if Night, fl ip to Day.

g. Each player:

4. Players play their turns:

b. Reset the Source – Reroll all mana dice in the Source, • Flips all Banner Artifacts and Skill tokens in their play a. Players take their turns in the order stated by the Round fol owing the conditions outlined in the “Game Setup”

area face up. They may (does not have to) discard any

Order tokens (from top to bot om). After the last player, the

section.

Banner Artifact assigned to their Units at this moment.

fi rst player plays again.

c. Create a new Unit off er.

• Readies all Units in their Unit area, including Wounded

b. If a player’s Deed deck is empty at the start of their turn,

• Take all Unit cards cur ently in the off er and put them on

ones (Wounded Units are not healed).

that player may announce the End of the Round instead of

the bot om of their cor esponding decks.

• Shuffl es all their Deed cards to create a new Deed deck.

playing their turn. If they do, each other player takes one last

• If there are some Advanced Action cards in the Unit off er,

• Draws cards up to their Hand limit. This may be

turn and then the Round ends.

put them to the bot om of the Advanced Action deck.

increased if they are on or next to a keep or city – see c. At the end of each player’s turn check the Scenario End

• Deal new Unit cards into the Unit off er equal to the

the description of these sites. If next to both, use only the

description to see whether the conditions have been met.

number of actual players plus 2.

higher eff ect. This may also be increased by an eff ect that

This will often involve all players having one last turn before

• If no Core tile has been revealed, deal Regular (silver

increases Hand limit “next time you draw cards” if that

the game then ends.

back) Units only.

eff ect occur ed on the player’s fi nal turn of the previous

d. If a player has announced the End of the Round and the

• If at least one Core tile has been revealed, alternate

Round.

Scenario End conditions have also been met then players

dealing Elite (gold) and Regular Units. (Elite, Regular,

3. Players choose Tactic cards for this Round.

get their fi nal turn according to whichever occur ed fi rst.

Elite, etc.)

a. Each player chooses one Tactic card displayed in the game

e. Players may not play any eff ects after their last turn in a

• If there are any monasteries on the map, add one

area.

round, not even those usable in another player’s turn.

Advanced Action card to the Unit off er for each

• The player with the lowest Fame picks fi rst, fol owed by

f. On a player’s last turn of a Round, any eff ects that increase

monastery that has not been burned.

the player with the second lowest Fame, etc. In case of

that player’s Hand limit the next time they draw cards

d. Refresh the Advanced Action off er – Remove the lowest

a tie, the player whose Round Order token is in a lower

transfer to the start of the next Round.

position Advanced Action card in the off er and put it on

position picks fi rst.

5. Check the Scenario description to see whether the game is

the bot om of the Advanced Action deck. Move each other

Note: This means that in the fi rst Round, the player who

over.

Advanced Action down one position in the off er, then draw

picked their Hero last chooses their Tactic card fi rst.

a. If the scenario conditions have been met or if the Round

a new card from the Advanced Action deck and add it to the

b. Fol ow any instructions on Tactic cards which say “when

limit is reached, the game is over and you should fol ow the

off er in the top position.

you take this Tactic”.

Scenario description to determine the outcome of the game.

b. If not, continue the game by playing the next Round.

DEED CARDS

b. A Spell can be powered by one mana of the depicted color

5. At the end of the turn, all played Deed cards go to your discard

to provide its basic eff ect. At Night it can be powered by one

pile. Unplayed cards remain in your hand, unless you decide to

1. All cards with this card back are Deed cards.

mana of the depicted color and one black mana to provide

discard one or more of them.

These consist of Action cards (Basic and

its strong eff ect. The color of a Spell card is determined by

Advanced), Spells, Artifacts and Wounds.

6. Some card eff ects order you to pay extra mana of some color,

the color required for its basic eff ect.

At the start of the game, players have only

or to discard (put to your discard pile) or throw away (remove

Basic Action cards in their Deed deck.

c. An Artifact can be played to provide its basic eff ect, or it can be

from the game) another card. These eff ects cannot be played if

thrown away (removed from the game) for its strong eff ect.

you are unable to do this.

2. Each turn, players will play Deed cards from

their hand. To play a card, put it in your Play

d. Wound cards cannot be played in any way.

a. Wound cards can be never discarded or thrown away this

area and perform the stated eff ect.

e. Any non-Wound card can be played sideways into the Play

way, unless the eff ect explicitly al ows so. Thus “any card”

refers to any card in your hand, except Wound cards.

3. Diff erent Deed cards can be played in diff erent ways:

area to provide either Move 1, Infl uence 1, At ack 1, or Block 1.

a. An Action card (Basic or Advanced) can be played to

• They can’t be played to provide Ranged At ack, Siege

provide its basic eff ect, or it can be powered by one mana

At ack, or any kind of elemental (Fire, Ice or Cold Fire)

of the depicted color to provide its strong eff ect. The color

At ack or Block.

of an Action card is determined by the color required for its

4. Cards that provide similar eff ects (even those of diff erent types)

strong eff ect.

can be played together to provide a cumulative eff ect. Stack the

played cards together and total their eff ects.

4





USING UNITS

4. Skil s are of three basic types:

“COMPOSITE” EFFECTS

1. Units are separated into two decks, Regular (silver card back)

a. Skill tokens with this symbol can be used only once a 1. Some cards (Concentration, Magic Talent, etc.) alow you to and Elite (gold card back). The card back does not impact game

Round, on your turn (except the Motivation skil , which can

play the eff ect of another card or token as part of their eff ect

play once Units are in the game.

also be used during other player’s turns). If you use such

a Skil , fl ip the token face down until the start of the next

(some even multiple times – Maximal Eff ect).

2. At the start of the game, players control no Units. Units gained

Round.

a. This is all evaluated as playing a single eff ect. So for instance,

(recruited) during the game are displayed in front of the player

you could not use Maximal Eff ect with Determination and

in the Unit area at all times (they will never be in a player’s hand,

b. Skill tokens with this symbol can be used once a

use the Block against diff erent enemy at acks.

Deed deck or discard pile).

Round, but their eff ect persists until the start of your

next turn. These Skil s will aff ect other players during their

b. You have to respect all the limitations of the played eff ects.

3. Each Unit in your Unit area has an assigned Command token.

turns while they are active. When using this type of Skil ,

For the purposes of resistances, each eff ect maintains its

You cannot have more Units than Command tokens in your

announce it loudly and put the token in the center of the

color, even if the mana is not actual y paid.

Unit area.

table. At the start of your next turn (or when the Round

c. Special case: The Time Bending spell has to be set aside after

a. Units with Command tokens above them are considered to

ends, if that comes fi rst), take it back and fl ip it face down. It

it is played. If you use another card (Magic Talent) to play

be Ready.

will be fl ipped up at the start of the next Round.

Time Bending , that card is set aside instead.

b. Units with Command tokens on them are considered to be

c. Skill tokens without any special symbols can be used once

Spent.

each turn.

“GAIN” EFFECTS

c. Units with a Wound card across them are considered to be

1. If an eff ect tells you to gain a mana token, take a mana token of

Wounded.

USING MANA

the cor esponding color and put it in your Play area.

4. Newly recruited Units are always Ready and not Wounded.

1. There are four basic colors of mana in the game (red, blue,

2. If an eff ect tells you to gain a crystal, take a mana token of the

a. If you want to gain a new Unit but all of your Command

white and green). The mana can be in two forms:

cor esponding color and put it in your Inventory. If you already

tokens are occupied, you must disband one of your Units.

a. Pure mana. This is represented by a mana die or by a mana

have three crystals of that color, gain a mana token of that color

Remove a disbanded Unit from the game. The newly

token in a player’s play area. When gained, it has to be used

to your Play area instead.

recruited Unit is Ready and not Wounded, regardless of the

before the end of the player’s turn, or it disappears.

3. If an eff ect tells you to gain a new Deed card (Advanced Action,

state of disbanded Unit.

b. Crystals. These are represented by a mana token in the

Spell, or Artifact) during or after your turn, the new card is

5. A Unit that is Ready and not Wounded may be activated for

player’s Inventory (on their Hero card). Up to three tokens

placed on top of your Deed deck unless stated otherwise.

one of its abilities.

of each basic color can be stored there.

a. Whenever you gain a card from the Spell off er or Advanced

a. To activate a Unit, put its Command token on it – the Unit is

• A crystal can be turned into pure mana at any moment of

Action off er, replenish the off er immediately by shifting the

no longer Ready, it is spent until the end of the Round.

a player’s turn. Pure mana cannot be turned into crystals

remaining cards down and adding a new card to the top slot

b. Then choose one of the abilities displayed on the Unit card

unless an eff ect says so.

of the off er.

and apply its eff ect. You may combine it with the eff ects of

2. There are two special colors (gold and black) that can be in pure

b. If you take a card from the Unit off er (either a Unit or an

other Deed cards, Skil s and Units.

form only (there are no gold and black crystals).

Advanced Action that you learned in a monastery), do not

• To choose an ability with a mana symbol in front of it,

a. During Day Rounds, gold mana can be used as mana of

replenish the off er. It will be replenished at the start of the

you have to pay mana of the cor esponding color fi rst.

any basic color (for all purposes, it is considered exactly the

next Round.

6. Whenever an eff ect al ows you to “Ready a Unit”, you may

same as using mana of the desired color). Black mana can

4. Any Artifacts and any rewards won during combat are gained

move the Command token above that Unit. The Unit is now

never be used during the Day.

at the end of your turn. See the “End of Turn” section.

Ready and can be activated again.

b. During Night Rounds, black mana can be used to power

7. An eff ect can only alter an ability of a Unit if that Unit has that

some eff ects. Gold mana can never be used at Night.

DISCARDING AND

ability. So for instance, to increase a Units Block it must already

3. The Source represents pure mana present in the world. Each

THROWING AWAY

have a Block value.

turn, a player may take one mana die from the Source and use it

8. Banner Artifacts can be assigned to a Unit at any time during

1. If an eff ect tel s you to discard a card, put the discarded card

as mana of the color shown on the die.

your turn. Put the Banner card partial y under the Unit card you

into your discard pile. You may never discard a Wound card,

a. Reroll any dice taken from the Source this way at the end of

are assigning it to. As long as the Banner is at ached to the Unit,

unless the eff ect explicitly al ows it.

the player’s turn, and return them to the Source.

the Unit can benefi t from its basic eff ect, but the strong eff ect is

2. If an eff ect tel s you to throw away a card then:

inaccessible.

b. Players take the dice at the moment when they want to use

a. If it is a Wound, put it back in the Wound pile.

the mana. Players are not al owed to take a die and then not

a. If the Unit is destroyed or disbanded, or if you assign another

use the mana it provides.

b. Otherwise, remove it from the game (return it to the box).

Banner to the same Unit, the Banner goes to your discard pile.

c. During Day Rounds any mana die in the Source showing

b. At the end of the Round, you may decide either to keep the

black mana is immediately depleted. During Night

Banner with the unit, or you can shuffl e it back into your

Rounds any mana die in the Source showing gold mana is

Deed deck.

immediately depleted. Depleted mana die cannot general y

9. At the end of your turn, do not discard or Ready a Spent Unit.

be used. They should be placed in the top right of the Source

Units are automatical y Readied at the end of each Round.

to make this clear.

USING SKILLS

EFFECTS

REVERTING

1. Skil s are represented by Skill tokens. Each character has their

1. Deed cards, Units, Skill tokens and some Tactic cards provide a

1. Unless you agree otherwise (not recommended),

own set of Skill tokens.

variety of eff ects that may be used on a given turn.

players may take back any actions and decisions they

make during their turn. It is faster to playout your

2. At the start of the game, players have no Skill tokens available

a. Many eff ects are described with shortcuts like Move X (gain

turn and change your mind than to at empt to plan

to them. Each time a Hero reaches an even-numbered Fame

X Move points) or Heal X (gain X Healing points). These

everything in your head.

level, they gain one Skill token.

terms are explained in the rules.

2. You cannot revert to a moment prior to any new

a. Players put the Skill tokens they gain during the game face

b. Other eff ects might al ow you to modify the rules for the

information being revealed (a map tile, enemy token, or

up in front of them.

turn, or to gain something you wouldn’t normal y be able to

card), a die rol ed or another player reacting specifi cal y

b. Players may gain Skill tokens of their own character, but

gain. For these types of eff ects, fol ow the text on the card.

to the player’s actions (usual y in Player vs. Player

also Skill tokens of other characters in the game. If they do,

• If the eff ect modifi es some values or rules, the change

combat).

they can use them the same way as their own – once a Skil

begins immediately and lasts until the end of the cur ent

a. Once this happens, all decisions, moves, played

is in the game, it does not mat er to which character set it

turn (unless stated otherwise).

cards, used Skil s and Unit abilities, spent mana etc.

belongs.

2. If you do not understand an eff ect or the interaction of two or

have to remain exactly as they were.

3. The use and eff ect of each Skill is depicted by icons on its token.

more eff ects in combination, check the game website for FAQs.

They are described in detail on the Skill Description card of

the cor esponding character.

5





1. Some Tactic cards, Skill tokens, and the village Description card

3. If your Deed deck is empty at the start of your turn, and if the

6. Playing a Regular turn has two voluntary parts: movement,

off er you options that are labeled as “before your turn” or “on

End of the Round has not been announced yet, you may forfeit

and a single action, in that order.

another player’s turn”.

your turn and announce the End of the Round. If you do, each

a. First, you may (but do not have to) move. You may reveal

a. For game purposes both of these are the same. You can play

other player takes one more turn, and then the Round is over.

new map tiles during movement. See the “Movement”

them while others are playing, or just before your turn.

a. You may only announce End of the Round if your Deed deck

section later.

Note: You can use eff ects playable “on another player’s turn”

is empty at the start of your turn.

b. Your movement may result in a mandatory action:

before your fi rst turn, even if you are the fi rst player to play

b. You must announce End of the Round if your Deed deck is

• If you ended your movement on a space occupied by

this Round. You may also use them between any two of

empty and you have no cards in your hand at the start of

another player, you must initiate Player vs. Player combat.

your turns, even if they immediately fol ow each other.

your turn.

• If you entered (i.e. assaulted) a fortifi ed site (keep, mage

b. You can also play these eff ects in reaction to another player

c. If you have cards in your hand, but your Deed deck is empty,

tower, city), you must fi ght all gar isoned enemies.

announcing they will play an eff ect (and evaluate them

it is up to you whether to announce End of the Round, or

• If your movement ended because you were at acked by

before that eff ect). You cannot do this in the middle of an

whether to play your turn.

rampaging enemies, you must fi ght these enemies.

eff ect evaluation.

d. If you have no cards in your hand and Deed deck, but the

c. If there are no mandatory actions, you may choose to perform

c. You cannot play them in the fol owing situations:

End of the Round has already been announced by another

one (and only one) of the fol owing voluntary actions:

• during your End of Turn sequence.

player, you must forfeit your turn.

• At inhabited sites (village, monastery, keep, mage

• before Tactic selection is fi nished at the start of the

tower, city) you may interact with the locals. See the

Round.

4. If you forfeit your turn, your turn ends immediately; you cannot

“Interaction with Locals” section later.

• after your last turn during the Round.

even use the benefi ts of a map space you occupy (mines or • At adventure sites (ruins, dungeon, tomb, monster den, d. You are not al owed to play other eff ects outside of your

magical glade).

spawning grounds) you may decide to explore them.

turn.

This will usual y lead to combat.

e. These eff ects usual y al ow you to draw cards from your

5. If you do not forfeit your turn, you have two options: playing a

• If there are rampaging enemies (orc marauders,

Deed deck. The fol owing conditions (whether the draw

Regular turn or Resting.

draconum) in one or more adjacent spaces, you can

deck is empty, whether you have cards in your hand) are

a. In both cases, you have to play or discard at least one

decide to chal enge one or more of them in combat.

checked after these actions are completed.

card during or at the end of your turn (except if your hand

• If in a monastery, you may decide to burn it. This leads

is empty but there are still cards in your Deed deck at the

to combat.

2. If your round order token is fl ipped then fl ip it back and miss

beginning of your turn).

• If none of the above actions are available, or if you do not

your turn.

b. You may play any number of special eff ects anytime

want to take any of these actions, you can do nothing.

a. In a cooperative game your round order token may be

after your turn starts and before you announce its end, d. You may do only one action each turn (mandatory or fl ipped because you took part in a cooperative city assault

including before you decide whether you are taking a

voluntary). If you want to move and/or reveal new tiles,

since your last turn.

Regular turn or Resting. The same applies for healing

you must do it before taking an action. You cannot move or

b. In a ful y competitive game your round order token may

eff ects , except these cannot be played during combat.

reveal map tiles after an action.

be fl ipped because you were a defender in a player versus

c. You may also play any number of move and infl uence

e. Unspent Move points and Infl uence points from previous

player combat that you ful y at ended since your last turn.

eff ects at any time during your turn just as you can

phases of your turn are lost at the moment you start your

c. Whether your round order token was fl ipped or not, any of

with special eff ects. Most of the time however there is no

action phase.

your cooperative or interactive skill tokens that are still in

reason to play these eff ects outside of their normal phases.

eff ect will now expire.

• Unless explicitly stated otherwise, you cannot move

7. If Resting, you cannot move, initiate combat or interact with

d. If you have to fl ip your round order token back then you

your fi gure or explore new tiles in phases other than the

locals.

cannot declare the End of the Round this turn.

Movement phase of your turn. Any eff ect that al ows for

this is ignored when played outside the Movement phase.

a. Depending on the contents of your hand, you must either

take a Standard Rest (if you have at least one card other than

a Wound in your hand) or a Slow Recovery (if you have only

Wound cards in your hand).

Note: Playing all of your non-Wound cards earlier in the turn

will eff ect which type of Rest you take.

•

Standard Rest: You must discard one non-Wound card

and any number of Wound cards.

Note: this is not the same as Healing, as the Wound cards

go to your discard pile.

• Slow Recovery: You must reveal your hand to show you

have only Wound cards. Then, discard one Wound card

to your discard pile.

8. Once you have done everything you wanted to do on your turn

(Regular turn or Resting), announce that your turn is over.

a. First, return any mana dice to the Source. Reroll any dice

you used before returning them. This is listed as the fi rst

thing you must do, as other players need this information

to be able to plan their turns.

b. Inform the next player (as per the Round Order tokens)

that they may now start their turn.

• This speeds up the play of the game. However, if the next

player insists, they may wait until you completely fi nish

your turn before they start theirs.

c. Finalize your turn while the other player begins theirs. See

the “End of the Turn” section.

• You cannot play eff ects during your end of turn

sequence.

6





1. You may move during a Regular turn (not Resting). During

e. Depending on the back color of the Map Tile being placed,

the eff ect states, and you may also move over inaccessible

movement, you can reveal new map tiles. All movement

additional limitations apply:

spaces (including those occupied by rampaging enemies

must be completed before taking any action (combat or

• Countryside tiles (green tile back) can only be placed

or fortifi ed sites), unless stated otherwise.

interacting with locals).

such that they will be adjacent to at least two other

• Some of these eff ects order you to end this move on a

tiles, or adjacent to a tile that borders at least two other

safe space (see below).

2. When moving, you may play any amount of movement

tiles.

d. A space is considered to be a safe space if:

eff ects . Most of these eff ects generate Move points.

• Core tiles (brown tile back) can only be placed such

• It is accessible under normal conditions (i.e. if no

a. You may play any number of movement cards from

that they will be adjacent to at least two other tiles.

special eff ects apply).

your hand (and power them with any available mana),

• If there are no tiles left in the Map Tile deck when a

• It is not an unconquered fortifi ed site, or a keep owned

use movement Skil s, or activate Units with movement

player at empts to explore, they may use a random

by an opponent.

abilities.

Countryside tile removed from the game during Setup.

• It does not contain another hero, except for sites that

b. The Move X eff ect means “you get X Move points”.

If all Countryside tiles have been placed, they can use

al ow more heroes (portal, conquered city).

c. Any card (except for a Wound) can be played sideways to

removed non-City Core tiles instead. Tiles explored

a movement column as Move 1.

this way can only be placed such that they are adjacent

to at least three other tiles (to fi ll up holes). If there are

8. Other players:

d. Players can also play any number of special

and

no tiles in the box, no more tiles can be explored.

healing eff ects during movement.

a. You are allowed to pass through spaces occupied by

f. For sites on a newly revealed tile, check the “When

another player’s fi gure freely, unless it is a keep owned by

revealed” section of the associated Site Description cards

that player.

3. Total the Move points provided by all your cards and eff ects.

and fol ow the text. Especial y:

• It is also al owed to enter a space with another player,

You may then move your fi gure, space by space, spending

•

If

a

monastery is revealed, draw one Advanced Action

to reveal a new map tile or tiles, and then to continue

Move points according to the type of ter ain you are moving

card and add it to the Unit off er (not the Advanced

movement.

into (as indicated by the Day/Night board). You may only

Action card off er).

move to accessible adjacent spaces.

b. If you enter space a with another player and you do not

g. If a tile with a city in its center is revealed:

want or cannot continue your movement this turn, it is

a. The spaces marked by X on the Day/Night board are

automatical y considered to be an attack on that player.

inaccessible.

• Take the cor esponding City card

and place it close to the map.

See Player vs. Player combat section later.

Note: The cost to move into the Desert and Forest ter ain

• Especial y, entering a keep owned by another player

diff ers according to whether it is Day or Night.

• Consult the Scenario description to

see of which level this city has to be.

while that player is there immediately ends your

Note: The cost to move into a city is always 2, regardless

Take the cor esponding City fi gure and rotate its base

movement and thus is automatical y considered to be

of the terrain shown on its space.

so the level of the city is shown in the window. Put the

an at ack on that player.

fi gure on the city space.

c. An at ack on another player is considered to be your

4. Limitations:

• The base shows circles of diff erent colors. For each

action for this turn. It is never al owed to do any other

a. Entering a space with an unconquered fortifi ed site

circle, draw an enemy token of the cor esponding color

action on a space occupied by another player.

(keep, mage tower, or city), or with a keep owned by

and place it face down on the City card.

d. On some spaces, there are multiple fi gures al owed.

another player immediately ends your movement, and is

Combat never occurs on those spaces:

considered to be an assault on that site.

6. During movement, you may move as many spaces and

• If you end your turn on a portal space, remove your

b. You are not al owed to enter a space occupied by a

explore as many tiles as you can pay Move points for.

fi gure from the map and place it in front of you. Place it

rampaging enemy (orc marauder or draconum) until a. You are al owed to alternate between exploring new back to the portal space at the start of your next turn.

they are defeated.

tiles and moving.

• If you enter a conquered city, place your fi gure off the

c. If you provoke a rampaging enemy (i.e. move directly from

b. You are al owed to play additional eff ects to add Move

map on the cor esponding City card. Place the fi gure

a space adjacent to their token to another space adjacent

points to your total at any time during movement.

back on the map once it moves away from the city.

to the same token), you are at acked by that enemy and

e. In certain situations, Player vs. Player combat is not

your movement immediately ends.

• You are al owed to play additional cards after a new tile

is revealed.

al owed. If you end your movement on the same space

d. Entering a space with an adventure site (ruins, monster

as another player in these situations, you cannot do any

den, spawning grounds, dungeons or tombs) does not • Move points from newly played eff ects are added action on your turn. Forced Withdrawal rules apply to

necessarily end your movement; you may ignore it and

to any Move points that might be left from your

you at the end of your turn (see the “End of the Turn”

treat it as an empty space, even if there are enemy tokens.

previously played eff ects.

section). These situations are:

• It is not possible to power previously played cards with

• The other player’s Round Order token is cur ently face-

mana for the strong eff ect – this has to be done when

5. During movement, you can reveal new map tiles:

down.

the card is played, or not at al .

a. You can only reveal new tiles if you occupy a space

• End of Round has been cal ed, and each player has

adjacent to a position where a new tile can be added.

their last turn this Round.

7. Some eff ects modify the rules of movement. These apply to

• Tiles must be placed in fi xed positions defi ned by the

• The scenario conditions were met, and each player has

all movement done after the eff ect is played, until the end of

symbols in their corners.

their last turn in the game.

turn.

• No tile can be added behind the coastline (see the

• You play a cooperative scenario, or you agreed Player

a. Some eff ects reduce the Move cost of certain terrains. If

Game Setup section, and the defi nition of the map

vs. Player is not al owed in your game.

a player plays more than one of this type of eff ect, they

shape in the scenario description).

can apply them in any order. If the Move cost of a terrain

• You play a team scenario, and that other player is your

b. To reveal a tile, a player has to spend 2 Move points.

is reduced to 0, the player may enter spaces of this terrain

teammate.

c. The new tile comes from the top of the Map Tile deck.

without paying any Move points. The Move cost of a

If the player occupies a space bordering two available

terrain cannot be reduced below 0.

positions for a new tile, they must announce which of

b. Some cards al ow a player to enter inaccessible terrain at

them they are exploring before revealing the tile.

certain cost. Beware - players should end their turn in a

d. Tiles are always oriented in a defi ned direction (so the

safe space (see below), otherwise, Forced Withdrawal

number in one of their corners is oriented the same way as

rules apply (see “End of the Turn” section, pg. 11).

the starting tile). Players do not decide how to orient tiles

c. Some eff ects directly al ow you to move one or more

when placing them.

spaces. For this, you do not pay any cost other than what

7





1. You can interact with locals at several diff erent places on

4. Once a player has calculated their Infl uence total, they can

e. Each city has its own interaction option depicted on the

the map (villages, monasteries, keeps you own, and mage

spend their Infl uence points on whatever the site off ers. See

lower half of the City card:

towers and cities conquered by any player). Interaction is your

the Site Description card, or the cor esponding City card for

•

In the Red city, you can buy Artifacts

action for that turn.

options.

for 12 Infl uence points each. The

2. When interacting, you may play any amount of infl uence

a. A Player can recruit a Unit from the Unit off er, as long as

Artifact is drawn at the end of the turn, as if you won

eff ects to generate Infl uence points.

one of the Unit types (icons in the upper left of the Unit

them in combat (see End of Turn – Combat Rewards).

a. Check the position of your Shield token on the Reputation

card) matches the site (icon in the upper right corner of the

•

track. You gain infl uence (positive or negative) equal to the

Description card). The Infl uence cost is stated in the upper

+

In the Blue city, you can buy Spells

as if you are in a mage tower.

modifi er shown immediately once you start the Interaction.

left corner of the Unit card.

•

Any later changes to Reputation during the turn have no

• For recruiting, see the “Basic Concepts – Using Units”

+

In the White city, you can recruit

Units of all types. Also, you can pay

eff ect on the bonus or penalty you gained.

section.

2 Infl uence points to add one Elite

• If your token is on the X space of the Reputation track,

• You can use a newly recruited Unit immediately (but you

(gold) Unit card to the Unit off er.

you cannot interact at al !

cannot use an Influence effect of that Unit to pay its own cost).

•

b. You can play infl uence cards from your hand (and power

b. Healing points can be bought at villages for 3 Infl uence

/ ? In the Green city, you may pay 6

Infl uence points to gain a card

them with any available mana), use infl uence Skil s, or

points and at monasteries for 2 Infl uence points (see the

from the Advanced Action off er (replenish the off er after)

activate Units with infl uence abilities.

Description card of these sites). See the “Wounds and

or a random card from the top of the Advanced Action

c. The Infl uence X eff ect means “you get X Infl uence points”.

Healing” section.

deck. Put the gained card on top of your Deed deck.

d. Any card (except for a Wound) can be played sideways to c. As described on the monastery Site Description card, an infl uence column as Infl uence 1.

a player can learn a new Advanced Action there for 6 5. You may buy any number of things of the same or diff erent e. Players can also play any number of special and healing

Infl uence points. The Advanced Action card must be from

types during an interaction, as long as you have the Infl uence

eff ects during interaction.

the Unit off er (not from the Advanced Action off er) and is

points to pay for them.

put on top of their Deed deck. The off er is not replenished

3. Total the Infl uence points provided by all your cards and

until the start of the next Round.

a. You apply the bonus or penalty (for Reputation and for

eff ects.

Shield tokens in a city) only once per turn, no mat er how

d. A player can learn new Spel s from the Spell off er at a mage

a. If interacting in a conquered city, you add 1 to your Infl uence

many things you buy.

tower. To gain a Spel , the player must pay 7 Infl uence points

total for each Shield token you have on the City card.

as well as one mana of the same color as the Spell they

Note: If these bonuses are high enough, you may interact

wish to acquire. A newly gained Spell is put on top of the

without playing any Infl uence eff ects.

player’s Deed deck and the Spell off er is replenished.

1. There are several ways to initiate combat with an enemy:

a. It can happen that a single move provokes two rampaging

c. Assign Damage phase – Any unblocked enemies deal

a. Entering a space with an unconquered fortifi ed site (keep,

enemies. You have to fi ght them both.

damage. Damage points must be assigned to your Hero

mage tower, or city). This is considered to be an assault, b. An assault is a move, and it can happen that it provokes and/or your Units.

and you must fi ght the defenders of that site. They are

one or more rampaging enemies. You have to fi ght both

d. Attack phase – At ack enemies using any other at acks

always fortifi ed (see later). Every time you make an assault,

the defenders and these rampaging enemies at once. The

remaining in your hand (including Ranged and Siege

you lose 1 Reputation, regardless of the outcome of the

rampaging enemies are not fortifi ed, though, and you can

At acks you have not used during the fi rst phase) to at empt

combat.

conquer the site even if you do not defeat them.

to eliminate enemies.

• Also, entering a space with a keep belonging to another c. If your move started a combat and there are one or more player counts as an assault and you lose 1 Reputation. If

rampaging enemies adjacent to the space you moved into, 4. During each phase a player can play cor esponding cards, use the other player is present in the keep, you start Player

you may chal enge them to join the fi ght. This means:

Skil s, and activate Units. Track the eff ects played in each phase

vs. Player combat. If not, a random gray enemy token is

• You may provoke a rampaging enemy by your move,

in separate columns.

drawn as gar ison of the keep (worth half Fame).

then chal enge one or more rampaging enemies adjacent

b. If you are at an adventure site containing enemies

to the space you moved into, and then fi ght them al .

(dungeon or tomb, unconquered monster den or

5. Unless a restrictive eff ect is otherwise stated, you may play

• When assaulting a fortifi ed site, you may also chal enge

spawning grounds, or ruins with enemies), you may

additional combat eff ects (that aff ect your Units, enemies,

any rampaging enemies adjacent to that site. They join

announce that you are entering the site as your action. This

or combat rules) during any of these phases. Unless stated

the defenders in combat, but are not fortifi ed and you do

initiates combat with all enemies in the site.

otherwise, that eff ect persists until the end of the turn.

not need to defeat them in order to conquer the site.

c. If you are standing at a monastery, you may announce

a. When using a red card, or a Unit ability that costs red mana

d. You cannot chal enge extra enemies when entering an

that you are at empting to burn it. If you do, you get

to activate, any eff ect, other than At ack or Block eff ects,

adventure site.

Reputation -3, then draw a random violet enemy token as

have no eff ect when targeting enemies with Fire resistance

the defender.

e. You can never fi ght enemy tokens and another player at the

.

same time. On your turn, you may do only one action, and

d. If you are standing adjacent to a rampaging enemy

b. When using a blue card, or a Unit ability that costs blue

both combat with enemies and Player vs. Player combat are

token (orc marauder or draconum), you can chal enge

mana to activate, any eff ect, other than At ack or Block

separate actions.

it to combat. If there are rampaging enemies on multiple

eff ects, have no eff ect when targeting enemies with Ice

adjacent spaces, you can choose to chal enge one or more of

resistance .

them to combat.

3. Combat starts by drawing and/or revealing all enemies you

c. Eff ects that target something other than an enemy (such as

e. If you make a move from a space adjacent to a rampaging

have to fi ght. Then, the combat has four phases:

the Ignore Site Fortifi cations eff ect of the Demolish spel )

enemy token to another space directly adjacent to the same a. Ranged and Siege Attack phase – Ranged and/or Siege are not prevented by any enemy resistances.

token, this provokes that rampaging enemy to at ack you.

At acks can be used fi rst to at empt to eliminate some

enemies before they get to at ack you.

6. Players can play any number of special eff ects during any

2. Only one combat is al owed each turn. However, in certain

b. Block phase – Enemies not eliminated by Ranged / Siege

combat phase. However, no healing eff ects may be played

situations, enemies from multiple spaces may be fought in that

make their at ack. Players can use Block eff ects to at empt

during combat.

combat:

to block these at acks.

8





RANGED AND SIEGE

BLOCK PHASE

ASSIGN DAMAGE PHASE

ATTACK PHASE

1. After performing any Ranged and Siege At acks, the Block

1. Any enemies that are still alive and unblocked deal damage

1. During this phase, you may perform one or more at acks, or

phase begins. In this phase, all enemies that have not been

from their attacks during this phase.

pass and do nothing.

eliminated get to at ack, but players have the chance to actively

a. If there are none, skip this phase.

counter the attack of one or more enemies by using blocks. A

b. Otherwise, process all unblocked enemies one by one in

2. To perform an at ack, choose one or more enemy tokens as

Blocked enemy deals no damage in the Assign Damage phase.

whatever order you choose.

the target of the at ack.

2. For each enemy with the Summon icon, draw a brown

2. Each enemy deals damage equal to its At ack value.

3. Play any number of Ranged Attacks and Siege Attacks of

enemy token and add it to the enemy group now.

any elements – Fire, Ice, Cold Fire, or physical (physical At acks

a. For both the Block Phase and the Damage Assigning Phase,

a. If the enemy has the Brutal ability, it deals twice as

have no elemental at ribute).

the summoned monster replaces the summoning enemy. No

much damage as its At ack value.

a. You may play cards that provide Ranged or Siege At acks

eff ect can target the summoning enemy during these phases.

3. You must assign al damage. You can assign damage to one or

from your hand (and power them with any available mana),

b. Once the At ack Phase begins the summoning enemy is

more of your Unwounded Units. The rest is assigned to your Hero.

use Ranged or Siege At ack Skil s, or activate any Units with

considered to be back in play and eff ects can target them.

Ranged or Siege At ack abilities. Stack these eff ects together

4. You can assign damage to a Unit as long as it is not Wounded.

in a column to help keep track of your total.

3. Choose a single attacking enemy to block.

Unwounded Spent Units can have damage assigned to them.

• If some of the chosen enemies are fortifi ed (either

a. Whenever a Unit is assigned damage, put a Wound card

because they are defending a fortifi ed site, or because 4. Play any number of Blocks of any elemental type – Fire, Ice, on that unit. A Unit becomes Wounded regardless of how

they have the fortifi ed ability on their token), only

Cold Fire, or physical.

much damage was actual y assigned. Then, reduce the

Siege Attacks can be played. You can play Ranged

a. Play cards that provide Block from your hand (you can

damage total by the Unit’s Armor value.

At acks only if none of the targeted enemies are fortifi ed.

power them with any available mana), use Block Skil s, or

• Assigning just one point of damage can Wound a Unit

• Enemies that are fortifi ed twice (because they have the

activate any Units with Block abilities. Stack these eff ects

with a high Armor value. Armor value simply determines

fortifi ed ability and they are defending a fortifi ed site) cannot

together in a column to help keep track of your total.

how much damage remains after the Unit is Wounded,

be targeted at all in this phase, even by Siege At acks.

b. Any card (except for a Wound) can be played sideways to

if any.

b. Cards cannot be played sideways to contribute to Ranged

the Block column as Block 1. Sideways cards are always

b. Exception: If the Unit is resistant to the elements of the

or Siege At acks.

physical Block, never a block of an elemental type.

at ack (Physical resistance vs. regular physical At ack, Fire

Resistance vs. Fire At ack, Ice Resistance vs. Ice At ack, both

4. Now total the Attack value of all the played eff ects:

5. Determine the total Block value of all played eff ects.

Ice and Fire Resistances vs. Cold Fire At ack):

a. If at least one targeted enemy has one or more Resistance

a. Against elemental at acks, only certain Blocks are ful y • First, reduce amount of the damage by the Unit’s icons, then all at acks of a type that match a resistance icon

effi cient:

Armor (without Wounding the Unit).

are ineffi cient – their strength is halved. (Total al ineffi cient

• Any type of Block is effi cient against a physical

at acks, divide the result by two, round down.)

at ack .

• If this absorbs all the damage, nothing happens.

• Cold Fire At acks are halved only when there is at least

• Only Ice or Cold Fire Blocks are effi cient against Fire

• If there is any remaining damage, continue assigning

one targeted enemy with both Ice and Fire Resistance.

At acks .

damage as usual by Wounding the Unit and reducing the

• Only Fire or Cold Fire Blocks are effi cient against Ice

damage total by its Armor value again.

5. To make a successful at ack, the total At ack value has to equal

At acks .

– Units resistant to the given type of at ack can absorb

or exceed the total Armor values of all targeted enemies.

twice as much damage as they have Armor, and are

If it does, the targeted enemies are defeated.

• Only Cold Fire Blocks are effi cient against Cold Fire

At acks .

Wounded only if the damage was greater than their

a. Defeated enemy tokens are immediately discarded to the

Armor.

discard pile next to their cor esponding enemy pile; they do

b. Other blocks are ineffi cient. Ineffi cient Blocks are reduced

• If a Unit is assigned damage but does not get Wounded

not participate in the rest of the combat.

by half. When totaling the fi nal Block value, total the values

of all ineffi cient Blocks, divide by two (round down) and

because of a resistance, it cannot be assigned damage

b. The at acking player scores Fame equal to the number

then add the full values of all effi cient Blocks.

again during the same combat.

on the bot om of each defeated enemy token. Move your

Shield token on the Fame track by that many spaces.

6. The Block is successful if the total value equals or exceeds the

5. If you cannot or do not want to assign damage to a Unit, or if

there is still damage left over after assigning damage to your

• If it crosses the end of a line, you do not Level up

at ack value of the chosen enemy.

Units, you must assign all remaining damage to your Hero.

immediately. Level ups are done at the end of the turn.

a. If the enemy has the Swift ability , its At ack value is

This is done repeatedly until all damage has been assigned:

doubled for the purpose of blocking.

6. An Attack of lower total value than the total Armor of the

a. To assign damage to your Hero, put a Wound card in your

enemies has no eff ect and any damage dealt does not car y

7. A successful y blocked enemy token is set aside. Its at ack

hand and reduce the damage total by your Hero’s Armor

over to subsequent phases or turns.

was stopped and it will do no damage during the next phase

value (the left number on your Hero’s Level token).

a. If you realize your At acks are not enough to defeat the

of combat. However, it is not eliminated yet. You will have a

• As with Units, even if the assigned damage is lower than

chosen enemies, you may want to either play more At acks,

chance to eliminate it in the Melee At ack phase.

your Armor value, your Hero must still take a Wound.

or choose a diff erent enemy to target, or take back the cards

a. If a summoned monster is successful y blocked, discard it to

b. Repeat the above process until all Damage has been

you played and cancel your at ack.

the cor esponding discard pile (but gain no Fame).

assigned. Eff ectively, you will take one Wound for every X

points of damage (where X is your Armor), rounded up.

7. You can declare none, one or more at acks during this phase. With

8. If your Block total is lower than the At ack value of the enemy

c. Knock out: If the number of Wound cards added to your

each at ack, you can defeat one or multiple enemies. Group the

you are at empting to block, it has no eff ect. You cannot lower

hand during a combat equals or exceeds your unmodifi ed

cards and eff ects you play for each at ack in separate columns.

the At ack value by playing Blocks – you either block it ful y, or

Hand limit (the right number on your Hero’s Level token),

a. If some of the enemies are fortifi ed and some are not, you

it goes through at the full strength.

you are knocked out – immediately discard all non-

may want to deal with the unfortifi ed ones with a separate

a. Sometimes a blocking card will have eff ects other than

Wound cards from your hand.

at ack (so you can use your Ranged At acks).

adding to your Block total. Unless stated otherwise, these

• Wounds received from other sources (for example: The

b. If some enemies have certain resistances and some not, you

eff ects apply whether or not the block was successful.

eff ects of some cards played during combat) also count

may want to deal with them with separate at acks, as the

towards knock out.

presence of a resistant enemy halves the value of all At acks

9. You may block any number of at acking enemies during this • While knocked out, your Units may continue to fi ght, you of the type it is resistant to.

phase. Any enemies you wish to block are resolved individual y;

you cannot block multiple enemies at once.

can use any of your Skils, and you continue taking Wounds

8. You may not save At ack points for later use. You must

if you have to assign further damage to your Hero.

immediately assign them to an enemy or group of enemies as 10. You must immediately assign Block points to an enemy at ack the points are generated or they are wasted.

as the points are generated or they are wasted. You may not

save Block points for later use.

9





6. Special enemy abilities related to damage dealing:

COMBAT OUTCOMES

3. If you did not defeat all the enemies at the site:

a. If an enemy has the Poison ability:

1. Combat ends after the At ack phase. You might defeat none,

a. If you fail to defeat a rampaging enemy, it stays in its space.

• If a Unit is assigned damage by a Poisonous enemy and

one, or more enemies during the combat.

b. If you failed to defeat enemies drawn in a dungeon, tomb, or

would be given a Wound, it is given two Wound cards

monastery, discard them. The next time a Hero at empts to

instead. It must be Healed twice to remove both Wounds.

a. If you were assaulting a city, put one of your Shield tokens

on the City card for each enemy you defeated. Put the

fi ght here, new enemies of the appropriate type will be drawn.

• A Hero assigned damage from a Poisonous enemy must

Shields in a row, so you can determine in which order they

c. If you failed to defeat the enemy in a monster den, or one or

put one Wound card into their discard pile for each

were put there later.

both monsters in a spawning grounds or ruins, return any

Wound card added to their hand.

remaining monsters face up on the space. Next time a Hero

b. If an enemy has the Paralyze ability:

at empts to fi ght here, they will fi ght the same enemies.

2. If you defeated all enemies at the site, depending on the site:

• If a Unit is assigned damage by a Paralyzing enemy and

Note: You may decide to return them face down, so that

would be given a Wound, it is immediately destroyed

a. If you defeated one or more rampaging enemies, remove

they are not confused with rampaging enemies, but anyone

(remove it from the game).

their tokens from the board: the icon on the space has no

can take a look at any token that was revealed earlier in the

meaning now, treat it as an empty space. You do not mark

• A Hero assigned damage by a Paralyzing enemy must

game.

the space with a Shield token, but you do gain Reputation

immediately discard any non-Wound cards from their hand.

(+1 for each orc marauders, +2 for each draconum).

d. If you failed to defeat all the defenders of a fortifi ed

c. If an enemy has the Summon

ability, you assign the

site, you have to withdraw back to the space you were

Note: Orcs and Draconum enemies encountered elsewhere

damage of the summoned enemy (taking into account any

at acking from. This withdrawal does not count as Forced

are not general y worth reputation when defeated.

special abilities it might have). After the at ack, discard the

Withdrawal. However, if the space you withdrew to is not

summoned enemy token to its cor esponding discard pile.

b. If you defeated all enemies on an adventure site, mark the

a safe space, then Forced Withdrawal rules apply for that

space with a Shield token. At the end of your turn, you can

space (see the “End of the Turn” section).

claim the reward indicated on the Site Description card. Do

7. The phase ends when you have assigned the damage from all

not pick your reward before the end of your turn; you CITY ASSAULTS

unblocked enemies.

can take your time choosing a reward while other players

are playing.

1. City assaults work the same way as assaulting any other

ATTACK PHASE

• If it is a ruins the reward may contain an Artifact ,

fortifi ed site, but in addition to the fortifi cation, each city gives

a Spell , an Advanced Action , a set of four crystals

a bonus to the defending Units. See the upper part of the

1. The At ack phase works the same way as the Ranged and

, or a Unit .

cor esponding City card:

Siege At ack phase, except:

c. If you defeated all the defenders of a fortifi ed site, you end

a.

In the White city, all defenders get +1 Armor.

a. You can combine any Attacks: Ranged, Siege or regular. In

your turn on the conquered space.

this phase, there is no diff erence between regular, Ranged

and Siege Attacks. Fortifi cations no longer apply, you can

Note: If some rampaging enemies were involved in the

b.

In the Blue city, all defenders get +2 At ack

target any enemy with any at ack or combination of at acks.

assault, whether you defeated them or not does not aff ect

if they have Ice At ack or Fire At ack, and

whether you conquered the fortifi ed site.

+1 At ack if they have Cold Fire At ack.

b. Any non-Wound card may be played sideways to an at ack

column as a physical At ack 1.

• If the site is a keep or mage tower, mark it with a Shield

c.

In the Red city, all defenders that have

token.

physical At ack gain the Brutal ability.

c. You may use eff ects that are labeled as usable in the At ack

phase only.

• If it is a mage tower, you will get to choose a Spell at the

d.

In the Green city, all defenders that have

end of your turn as a reward.

physical At ack gain the Poison ability.

• If it was a city, see City Assaults later in these rules.

2. As in the Ranged and Siege At ack phase, you may eliminate

multiple enemies in one at ack, or declare multiple individual

d. If you defeated the defenders of a monastery, mark the 2. If a city is conquered, its new leader must be determined.

at acks. The rules for enemy resistances are the same.

monastery with a Shield token. The monastery is now a. The player with the most Shield tokens on the City card (or burned and is treated like an empty space for the remainder

the one with the fi rst Shield amongst the tied in case of tie)

of the game. At the end of your turn, claim an Artifact as

becomes the City leader.

your reward.

b. The leader takes the City card, including all the Shield

tokens, in front of them. Note when any player enters the

city, they put their fi gure on the City card in front of that

player, to emphasize the fact they are visiting their city.

10





1. You can complete your turn while the next player starts theirs.

b. Artifacts – draw that many plus one from the Artifacts

• In both cases, put the newly gained Skill in front of you

The fi rst thing you should do is reroll and return any mana

deck. Place one of them on the bot om of the Artifacts deck,

(face up), put the newly gained Action card on top of

dice you used to the Source.

and put the rest on top of your Deed deck in any order.

your Deed deck, then refresh the Advanced Action off er

c. Spells or Advanced Actions – choose them from the

(by moving cards down and adding a new card to the

2. Forced Withdrawal: You must end your turn on a safe space

cor esponding off er and put them on top of your Deed

topmost position).

(see paragraph 7d in “Movement” section, pg. 7).

deck, then replenish the off er by moving cards down and

a. If you are not on a safe space, you must backtrack your move

adding a new card to the topmost position. You cannot gain

7. Drawing new cards:

until you ar ive at a safe space.

Advanced Action cards that are in the Unit off er this way.

a. Before drawing, you may discard any number of non-

b. For each space you move while backtracking, add a Wound

d. Units – take any Unit from the Unit off er, regardless of its

Wound cards from your hand, if you wish.

to your hand.

type or cost. If you do not have an open Command token for

the Unit to occupy, you must disband one of your Units or b. Draw cards from your Deed deck, up to your Hand limit (the forfeit the reward.

number on the right side of your Hero’s Level tile).

3. Clear up your play Area:

• Exception: If you also get a Level up this turn that gives

• If you are on or next to a keep you own (marked with

a. Return all mana crystals, used or unused, from your play

you a new Command token, you may postpone taking a

your Shield token), your Hand limit is increased by the

area to the bank.

new Unit until you process your Level up, so you do not

number of keeps you own anywhere on the map.

b. Put all cards played this turn into your discard pile (except

have to disband a Unit.

• If you are on or next to a conquered city you have at

those that were thrown away – remove them from the

least one Shield token in, your Hand limit is increased

game, or, in the case of Wounds, put them back on top of the

by 1 (by 2 if you are the leader of that city).

6. Level up: If your Shield token crossed one or more lines on the

Wound pile).

Fame track this turn, you gain a level for each line crossed:

• If both a keep and a city bonus are possible, use the

higher bonus only.

a. When advancing to a level marked with this icon:

4. Use the benefi ts of your space:

• Your Hand limit can also be increased by the Day Tactic

• Remove your top Level token, revealing your new Armor

card “Planning” (see that card).

a. If you end your turn on a magical glade, you may throw

value and Hand limit.

away one Wound card from your hand or discard pile. Units

c. If you have more cards in your hand than your cur ent Hand

• Flip the removed token over so it is shield side up and

cannot be Healed this way.

limit, you do not have to discard down to your Hand limit

place it in your Unit area. It is now a Command token:

(but you draw no new cards).

b. If you end your turn on a crystal mine, you gain a crystal

your Command limit is increased by one.

of the mine’s color to your Inventory (unless you have

d. If you run out of cards in your Deed deck while drawing,

b.

When advancing to a level marked with these icons,

3 crystals of that color already – in which case you get

stop drawing. Do not reshuffl e your discard pile unless you

you get one new Skill token and one Advanced Action

nothing).

have the Night Tactic card “Long Night” (see that card).

card from the off er. Flip the top two Skill tokens from your

Skill deck. You have two options now:

Note: The Long Night Tactic can be used even during

card drawing: once your Deed deck is empty, fol ow its

5. Rewards from combat: If you won any rewards from a

•

Take one of these two tokens and put the other in

instructions and then continue drawing.

combat, take them now. Pick your rewards in whatever order

the Common Skil s area. In addition, take any one

you choose. If you won:

Advanced Action card from the Advanced Action off er.

a. Crystals – add them to your Inventory (unless you already

•

Take

a

token of another player from the Common Skil s

have 3 of that color – then nothing happens). If you gained

area (if there are any), then put both of your revealed

any random crystals, rol a die for each reward to determine

Skil s in the Common Skil s area. In addition, take the

which color you receive. If black is rol ed, you gain 1 Fame

Advanced Action card from the lowest position on the

instead. If gold is rol ed, you may choose the color.

Advanced Action off er.

1. When a Hero gets wounded, the player takes one or more 2. Wounded Units have Wound cards placed across the face of

• To heal a Wounded Unit, you have to pay Healing

Wound cards from the Wound pile and puts them into their

the Unit card.

points equal to the level of the Unit (the number in its

hand.

a. Wounded Units cannot be activated or assigned damage in

upper right corner). If you do, remove the Wound card

a. Wound cards can never be discarded, unless an eff ect

combat.

from the Unit and return it to the Wounds pile.

explicitly states otherwise. Wound cards cannot be played

b. A Wounded Unit retains its state of readiness (Ready or

• If the Unit has two Wound cards (because it was exposed

sideways (as Move 1, Infl uence 1, At ack 1 or Block 1), and

Spent). A Wounded Unit that is Spent still becomes Ready

to a Poison at ack), it needs to be healed twice to be

cannot be discarded at the end of your turn.

at the start of a new Round (but can’t be activated until

healed completely.

b. When you choose to Rest for the turn, or when an eff ect

Healed).

• Eff ects that heal a Unit will heal one Wound on that Unit.

al ows you to discard Wound cards, they go onto your

d. Players can heal any time during their turn, except during

discard pile. Thus during the next Round, you may draw

combat.

them into your hand.

3. Players can Heal during their turn, even when Resting.

• Damage from a combat can be healed on the same turn,

c. When the Round ends, any Wounds in your hand get

a. You can play eff ects that provide Healing points (Heal X).

once the combat is over.

shuffl ed back into your Deed deck with all your other Deed

b. You may also buy one or more Healing points at a village or

cards.

monastery (see the “Interacting with Locals” section).

• Any unspent Healing points disappear when entering

c. Add up all Healing points played or bought; they can be

combat.

used for these healing eff ects:

Note: the magical glade site does not provide healing. Its

•

Use

one Healing point to throw away a Wound card

eff ect may not be used on Units and cannot be combined

from hand (return the Wound card to the Wounds pile).

with other healing eff ects.

11





1. A player can invoke Player vs. Player combat as their action •

They

may use their Skil s for eff ects valid in the cur ent

RANGED AND SIEGE

for the turn, if they meet the fol owing conditions:

situation.

ATTACKS

a. They entered a space containing another player and does

• After combat, they may play special and healing cards

not want to or cannot continue moving.

and eff ects, if they wish.

1. In this phase, players take turns playing Ranged and Siege

b. The space is a not a portal or a city space (fi ghts between

• Then, they fol ow all the usual end of turn steps (see the

At acks, starting with the defender. The player performing an

players are not al owed on these spaces).

“End of the Turn” section).

at ack is referred to as the attacker and the other player is the

c. The End of the Round has not been announced yet, and the

• They may not Move, reveal a map tile, or perform any

blocker, regardless of who is the aggressor or defender.

end game condition has not been triggered.

other action.

2. When it is a player’s turn to perform an At ack, they can choose

d. The other player’s Round Order token has not been fl ipped

Note: A player may not ful y at end a combat if they have no

to perform an at ack or pass.

face-down (either from another Player vs. Player combat or

non-Wound cards in hand.

3. To perform an at ack, the at acker plays any amount of Ranged

from a cooperative assault).

b. Partial y Attend the Combat. A player may choose to not

or Siege Attacks (and special eff ects), as if it were a regular

Note: It is not al owed to enter a space occupied by another

skip their next turn. In that case:

combat.

player by a move that provokes a rampaging enemy to at ack.

• They do not fl ip down their Round Order token and are

a. If the blocker is also the defender and the combat is taking

2. If Player vs. Player combat occurs, the at acking player is

subject to at ack from other players. They will play their

place at a fortifi ed site (a keep or mage tower), the at acker/

refer ed to as the aggressor, and the defending player is

next turn as normal.

aggressor can only use Siege At acks.

refer ed to as the defender. The defender gets a chance to

•

They

cannot use a mana die from the Source (unless

b. Cards played sideways cannot contribute to this at ack.

defend by either ful y or partial y playing their turn during the

some eff ect states otherwise).

aggressor’s turn. The defender cannot move or perform an

4. Then, the blocker can play any amount of Blocks (and special

•

They cannot use their Skill tokens (except those

action (interaction or initiating another combat) during this

eff ects), as if it were regular combat.

useable in turns of other players).

combat.

a. The rules for effi cient and ineffi cient Blocking outlined in

• When the combat is over, their part of the turn

regular combat apply normal y.

3. When at acked, the defender can use any eff ects normal y

immediately ends. They cannot heal or play other

usable before their turn or in turns of other players (such as

special eff ects after combat.

• If the At ack consists of At ack eff ects of multiple

plundering a village). They may not declare End of the Round.

elements, the Block eff ect is effi cient if it is effi cient

• They do not fol ow the normal end of turn procedure.

Then, they have two options.

against at least one element represented in the At acks.

Especial y, they do not draw new cards. Any unused

a. Ful y Attend the Combat. A player may choose to take

mana crystals remain until the end of their regular turn.

b. Unlike regular combat, it is not necessary to block the

their next turn in advance. If they do:

entire attack, at acks can be partial y blocked – thus it is

Note: The defender can still block an opponent’s at acks

useful to block portions of the at ack.

• They fl ip their Round Order token down. As long as it

and perform their own at acks. The diff erence is in the

is face-down, they cannot be attacked again. When it

means they can use to do so, and what happens after

c. The total value of the at ack is reduced by 1 for each 2

would be the defender’s next turn, the token is fl ipped

combat.

points of total value of the blocks played.

back up but they skip the turn completely (they cannot

• This is because the Ranged and Siege At acks work

even announce End of the Round).

4. Player vs. Player combat has two phases: Ranged and Siege

similar to the Swift ability of an enemy. If the blocker uses

Attacks, and Melee Attacks. Combat ends when one of the

•

They

may benefi t from start of turn eff ects such as the

an eff ect that says “blocked enemy loses Swiftness”, then

players is forced to retreat, or when neither player wants to

mana token provided by a magical glade.

the block works ful y: the at ack is reduced by 1 for each

at ack any more. If that is the case, the aggressor must retreat.

point of block.

•

They

may use a mana die from the Source.

Example: If the at acker uses Fire Ranged At ack 4, and you

play Ice Block 4, the at ack is reduced to 2. If you play Block

7, the at ack is reduced to 3 (total value of your ineffi cient

block is 3, which reduces the at ack by 1 only).

d. If the at ack is not reduced to zero, the remainder is turned

into damage that must be assigned to the blocker (either

their Hero or their Units).

5. Unlike assigning damage in regular combat, the attacker

chooses how to assign the damage. Contrary to a regular

combat, the at acker has to have as much damage as is the

Armor of the chosen target to wound it (while in combat with

enemies, 1 damage is enough to wound a Unit or Hero).

a. The at acker may wound any of the blocker’s Unwounded

Units by assigning damage equal to that Units Armor.

• If the Unit is resistant to any element used in the at ack,

its Armor is doubled, so the at acker has to assign twice

as much damage to wound the Unit.

b. The at acker may wound the blocker’s Hero by assigning

damage equal to that Hero’s Armor. This can be done

multiple times, and the blocker takes a Wound card in their

hand each time.

• The blocker can get knocked out if they get too many

Wounds – see Combat with enemies.

c. The at acker may leave some at ack points unassigned.

They have to leave them unassigned if there is no target with

Armor equal to or lower than remaining damage.

6. After resolving the at ack, the other player gets their chance

to be the at acker, and the Ranged and Siege At ack phase

continues with both players alternating the roles of at acker

and blocker. If both players pass on at acking in succession, the

phase ends.

12





MELEE ATTACKS

• The at acker must spend damage equal to the 2. Eff ects that target enemies can target opponent’s Unwounded unmodifi ed Move cost of that space.

Units. You may never target the enemy Hero with them.

1. The Melee At ack phase works similarly to the Ranged and

Siege At ack phase, with a few diff erences:

• The blocker is moved to that space and the combat ends.

a. If the eff ect is from a red card, or if it is a Unit ability activated

This move never provokes rampaging enemies to at ack.

by red mana, it has no eff ect against Units with Fire

a. The aggressor gets to start as the at acker instead of the

Resistance.

defender.

3. Players alternate roles as at acker and blocker until either one

b. If the eff ect is from a blue card, or if it is a Unit ability

b. Any combination of At ack eff ects can be played, including

player is forced to retreat or until both players pass on at acking

activated by blue mana, it has no eff ect against Units with

Ranged and Siege. Fortifi cations are ignored in this phase.

in succession.

Ice Resistance.

c. It is possible to play any card sideways as physical

c. If the eff ect says to “destroy” an enemy, the Unit is Wounded

At ack 1. Note that adding to an at ack this way will make

COMBAT OUTCOME

instead.

it count as a physical At ack if it wasn’t already (making any

1. If a player is forced to retreat, combat is over and the other

Block effi cient against it and doubling Armor of Units with

d. The Armor value of a Unit can never be reduced below 1.

player is considered to be victorious and may gain some Fame.

Physical resistance).

e. The special eff ects of blocks that aff ect the blocked enemy

a. If the victorious player is of a lower level than the one forced

d. The blocks work ful y, i.e. the at ack is reduced by 1 for

may target any Unit contributing to the at ack, if there are

to retreat, they gain 1 Fame plus 2 Fame for each level they

each point of total block played.

any. If the eff ect is triggered only by a successful block, it

are lower.

works only if the blocker reduces the at ack to zero.

2. Damage can be used to Wound Units and/or the enemy b. If they are of the same level but lower Fame, they gain 1

f. The strength or cost of some eff ects may depend on the

Hero, as in the Ranged and Siege At ack phase. In addition,

Fame.

number of enemies. In Player vs. Player combat, this is the

there are two other ways to spend damage:

c. If they are of the same or higher Fame, they gain nothing.

number of opponent’s Ready Unwounded Units and Units

a. The at acker can spend 5 damage to steal one Artifact

contributing to the cur ent at ack or block, plus 1 for the

from the blocker and put it in their discard pile:

2. If combat ended because neither player wanted to at ack any

more, the combat is a draw and no one gets any Fame.

enemy Hero.

• Artifacts can be stolen if they are in the blocker’s discard

3. Eff ects that modify values or rules (such as ignoring

pile, Play area, or assigned to a Wounded Unit (including

a. The aggressor must withdraw to the space they were

fortifi cations) last for the entire combat.

Units wounded during this at ack).

at acking from. This withdrawal does not count as Forced

Withdrawal. However, if the space they withdrew to is not

• Artifacts that are in the blocker’s hand, Deed deck or

4. Eff ects that prevent an enemy from at acking may be played

a safe space then Forced Withdrawal rules apply for that

assigned to a unwounded Unit cannot be stolen.

when you are blocking. Choose a Unit contributing to the

space (see the “End of the Turn” section).

at ack and deduct its contribution from the at ack total. The

b. Damage can be converted to Move points, and spent to

Unit remains Spent. You cannot cancel enemy special eff ects or

force the blocker to retreat. To do so:

SPECIAL COMBAT

Blocks this way.

• The at acker has to choose an accessible safe space

adjacent to where they are fi ghting (i.e. would not result

EFFECTS

5. Eff ects that al ow you to skip the Blocking and Damage dealing

in that player being forced to assault a fortifi cation or

1. In regular combat, you may play various eff ects other than

phases of combat can be used to cancel any one attack (Siege/

incur combat against another player).

At acks and Blocks. Most of these can also be used when

Ranged or Melee). No damage is dealt for this at ack (but the

fi ghting another player.

cards remain played, Units Spent etc.). The combat continues,

however.

1. In cooperative scenarios (and also in competitive scenarios, if

c. If all invited players agree, the cooperative assault can

players agree), players can cooperate to conquer a city.

begin. If not, nothing happens. The player can try to make

another proposal, or continue their turn as if no proposal

2. A player can initiate a cooperative city assault on their turn if:

had been made.

a. The End of the Round has not been announced yet, and the

4. If the players agree to the proposal, all invited players fl ip their

scenario conditions have not yet been fulfi l ed.

Round Order token face down, to mark that they give up their

b. They have not taken an action yet (and if the players agree on

next turn.

a cooperative as ault, it is considered to be their action for this

turn).

5. Then, shuffl e and randomly distribute (without even

c. Their fi gure is on a space adjacent to the city, and there is no

looking at the reverse side) enemy tokens amongst the

other player on that space.

players, respecting the agreed numbers. (Imagine: You can

agree how long a section of the city wal s you will at ack, but

Note: they can also initiate the at ack if they are able to

cannot predict which units will defend that part).

reach the city using the “Underground At ack” Spell.

d. Resolve the assault as usual (including Reputation loss and

assigning Shields on the City card for defeated enemies).

d. There are one or more suitable Heroes present. A Hero is

6. Participants take turns assaulting the city according to

suitable if all of the fol owing are true:

the Round order, starting with the player that initiated the

• Each player faces only the enemies assigned to them

and ignores the others.

• They are on a space adjacent to the city.

cooperative at ack:

• Eff ects aff ecting “all enemies” aff ect only those assigned

• They have not had their Round Order token fl ipped face

a. Each player performs all phases of their combat before the

to the player.

down (either from another cooperative assault or from

next player.

Player vs. Player combat).

b. Each player may use one die from the Source (but they do

7. The city is conquered when all defenders were defeated

(whether or not rampaging enemies that joined the combat

• They have at least one non-Wound card in hand.

not return it until the assault is over) as well as all eff ects

they could use before, at the start of, or during their turns.

were defeated).

3. The player announces they would like to form a cooperative

c. Each player has to start by moving directly to the city.

a. If it is not conquered, all players have to withdraw to the

assault:

• No other movement or actions are al owed.

space where they at acked from.

a. They invite one or more suitable Heroes. They may decide

• If this move provokes some rampaging enemies, they are

8. Then, participants take turns ending their turns as usual, in

to exclude a Hero even if they are suitable.

added to that player’s portion of enemies.

the Round order (see the “End of the Turn” section).

b. They propose how to distribute the quantity of enemies

• Players may voluntarily chal enge any other rampaging

a. Players can play any healing

and special eff ects

in the city, i.e. how many enemies each player will face. Each

enemy adjacent to the assaulted city and add them to

before the end of their turns, just as after a regular assault.

player has to be assigned at least one enemy.

their enemies.

13





This scenario book has three parts. First, there are some general principles that apply to all scenarios, or to a subcategory of scenarios (like cooperative scenarios).

In the second part, there are optional variant rules you can use for your game. The third part contains descriptions of the scenarios.

In each scenario description, there is a recommended map shape for

the various number of players al owed in that scenario. Note: Any

map tiles revealed during setup are taken from the Tile deck being

used in the scenario.

Wedge Map

This shape uses starting tile A. It is similar to the one in the starting

scenario, with one extra rule:

• Core (brown) tiles cannot be added to the coastline. (i.e. to the

leftmost and rightmost lane of tiles).

The map starts tight, but then opens relatively quickly, and soon it





A


can be wide. The extra rule prevents the Cities being too far from one

another.

This map is most suitable for 2 or 3 players. Because of its nar ow start,

it is not recommended if the players are of diff erent levels of experience:

With 3 players, an inexperienced player may get blocked at the start.

With 4 players, this risk gets even higher and harder to avoid.

Fully Open Map

A ful y open map uses starting tile B, and you deal three tiles adjacent

to it at the start. The coastline opens out in a much wider angle here.

However, it does not open forever – the map can have a maximum of 5

paral el columns of tiles. Imagine the coastline in each direction breaks

after you add two tiles to the starting tile. See the picture to the right.

A ful y open map is suitable for a comfortable 4 player game. For less

players, it is a bit too vast, and there may not be enough interaction in

later phases of the game.

Open Map Limited to 4 or 3 Columns

This is the same shape, except the map is limited to 4 or 3 columns only.

(With 4 columns, it opens more to the right than to the left). See the

pictures.

The 4 column map is suitable either for a 3 player game, if you do not

want the start to be too crowded, or for a 4 player game, if you want

more interaction between the players.

Similarly, the 3 column map is suitable for a 2-3 player game, if you want

the interaction to be tight during the entire game. Note: If you play with

3 or 4 players here, someone could rush forward and the ones that stay

behind may not have enough interesting places to explore and conquer.





In the Mage Knight Board Game, players themselves determine

• They do not benefi t from the Tactic, it just determines when

Note 1: The Dummy player does not play too aggressively, so

the pace of the game. If someone is rushing, playing most of their

they play in Round Order: Ar ange the Round Order tokens by

you have enough time to play effi ciently. Sometimes, though, the

cards each turn, the others have to adjust their tempo, or end up

the Tactic numbers, as usual.

random fl ips may mean that they go through their deck much

with half of their decks unused at the end of a Round. If the players

faster. Watch the Dummy player’s deck to adjust your tempo!

cooperate, it would be advantageous to agree to play careful y,

When it is the Dummy player’s turn:

Note 2: You have a slight control over the Dummy player’s deck

trying to get the maximum eff ect from every card – then the tempo

• If their Deed deck is empty, they announce the End of the

and crystals. It may be advantageous not to let them get crystals

adjusting aspect of the game would disappear, and the game

Round. Other players have one more turn, and the Round is

and cards of the same color.

would take forever. To avoid this, whenever you play a cooperative

over.

Note 3: The deck used for the Dummy player is the main reason

or solo mission, there is one automated Dummy player.

• If their Deed deck is not empty, fl ip over three cards from their

why all cooperative scenarios are up to three players only. If you

Dummy Player

Deed deck and put them in their discard pile. Check the color of

the last fl ipped card (topmost card of the discard pile):

real y wish to play a four player cooperative scenario, simply create

At the start of the game:

another deck from one of the remaining Heroes.

– If the Dummy player has no crystals of that color in their

• After players choose their Heroes, randomly choose one of the

Inventory, their turn is over.

Skil s in a Solo Game

Heroes that is not in the game as a Dummy player Hero. You

– If they have any crystals of that color, fl ip as many additional

In a Solo game, you also use a set of Skil s belonging to the Dummy

only need their Hero card, their Round Order token, and their

cards as they have crystals of that color. Then, their turn is

player’s Hero. Either remove the Competitive Interactive Skill (with

starting deck of 16 Basic Action cards.

over (the color of the additional y fl ipped card(s) does not

the symbol) of the Dummy player Hero before the game or, if

• Take a look at their Hero card. At the bot om, there are three

matter).

drawn during the game, discard and replace it with another token

colored dots (for example Goldyx has green, green and blue).

• Note: If there are not enough cards in their Deed deck, fl ip

from the stack.

Give three crystals of these colors (one for each dot) to the

as many as you can. On their next turn, the Dummy player

Whichever you decide to do, randomize the tokens being used and

Dummy player’s Inventory. Note: this applies for the Dummy

announces End of the Round.

place them in a face down pile.

player only. Other characters start with no crystals.

Every time your Hero has gained a Skill token, also reveal one Skill

• Shuffl e that Hero’s Deed deck, and the Dummy player is ready.

When preparing a new Round:

of the Dummy player, and put it into the Common Skill off er – it

Note: Do not count the dummy player for the purpose of

• When removing the lowest card from the Advanced Action

is available to you the next time you may gain a Skill token. If you

determining how many mana dice and Units to use in a scenario.

off er, add this card to the Dummy player’s deck instead. Then

shuffl e the Dummy player’s deck.

choose such a Skill from the Common Skill off er, you have to take

When picking Tactics:

the lowest Advanced Action card, as with usual Level Up rules.

• When removing the lowest card from the Spell off er, put it to

• See the Scenario description for how the Dummy player

the bot om of the Spel s deck, as usual. In addition, add one

chooses their Tactic card at the start of each Round.

crystal of the same color as that Spell card to the Dummy

player’s Inventory. Contrary to real players, they can have more

than 3 crystals of the same color.

Some four player scenarios are played by two teams. Separate

Source etc. However, al ied players should not say which cards

• When scoring, each team has one common score.

the players into teams randomly or by agreement before Hero

they have in their hand, nor help each other out on details when

– The base score is the Fame of the player that has the lower

selection.

playing their turn (how to play cards, use Units, pay mana etc.).

Fame. Ignore the Fame of the player with higher Fame.

• The interactive Skil s (the ones writ en in a diff erent color on

Each player is individual y responsible for how they play.

– For Achievements, and any similar scoring, score only the

the Skill Description card) ignore your fellow player.

• Al ied players cannot share the same space at the end of the

higher score of both players in this area. Ignore the score of

• However, the interactive Spel s (the ones that aff ect other

turn (except for cities and the portal). If this would happen,

the player that scored least. For the Greatest Beating, score

players) do not ignore your fel ow player. Magic does not

Forced Withdrawal rules apply for the player who entered the

only the player with the largest penalty.

recognize friend from foe.

space later.

– Assign titles as usual (compare only the larger values of both

• Al ied players cannot trade crystals, Artifacts, Units etc. Mage

• Al ied players may not engage in Player vs. Player combat with

teams).

Knights are very individual, it is a wonder they cooperate at al .

each other.

Note: It is therefore advantageous if each player in the team

• Rules for cooperative city assault are recommended, but you

• A player may enter an empty keep owned by their al y, and they

concentrates on diff erent things, as long as no one fal s behind

can also cooperate in other ways: You may agree who goes

can recruit Units there. When in or adjacent to an al ied keep,

with Fame, and no one is too Wounded.

which way, who needs which Tactic, who would like to take

their Hand limit is increased, but only for the keeps they own

which cards from the off ers, who needs a particular color in the

themselves.

The Greatest Knowledge

The Greatest Leader

The Greatest Adventurer

Each player scores 2 Fame for each Spell, and 1 Fame for each

Each player scores Fame equal to the total level of all their Units.

Each player scores 2 Fame for each Shield token they have on an

Advanced Action in their deck. The player who scores the most

Wounded Units are counted only as half, rounded down (thus a

adventure site. The player who scored the most Fame this way gets

Fame this way gets 3 extra Fame for achieving the Greatest

Wounded level 1 Unit is worth no Fame). The player who scored

3 extra Fame for being the Greatest Adventurer (1 if tied).

Knowledge. If two or more players are tied, each gets 1 Fame

the most Fame this way gets 3 extra Fame for being the Greatest

(except if the tie is between players who scored no Fame in this

Leader (1 if tied).

category).

+1 +1. .

+1 +1. .

+1 +1. .

The Greatest Loot

The Greatest Conqueror

The Greatest Beating

Each player scores 2 Fame for each Artifact in their deck or on their

Each player scores 2 Fame for each Shield token they have on a

Each player loses 2 Fame for each Wound card in their deck (not

Units, and 1 Fame for every two crystals in their Inventory. Again,

keep, mage tower or monastery. The player who scored the most

on their Units). The player who lost the most Fame this way loses

the player who scored the most Fame this way gets 3 extra Fame

Fame this way gets 3 extra Fame for being the Greatest Conqueror

an additional 3 Fame for receiving the Greatest Beating (-1 if tied,

for achieving the Greatest Loot (1 if tied).

(1 if tied).

except if the tie is between players that have no Wounds).

+1 +1. .

+1 +1. .

-1 -1. . v





Variants are here to add even more variety to the game, and to

playing and which variant rules apply BEFORE the start of the

• Even if your group has a set of variant rules you usual y use,

adjust it to your tastes. We recommend you fol ow these rules

game, i.e. even before Hero selection.

you should abandon them temporarily when introducing new

when picking variants:

• Do not pick too many variant rules at once, as you might easily

players to the game. Play “The First Reconnaissance” scenario

• You should play your fi rst few games with the standard rules

forget which rules apply and which do not.

without any variant rules. The new players will have lots to

only, to bet er understand the game.

• If you realize that you like a variant rule so much you are always

digest even with the standard rules.

• Only use a variant rule if all players agree.

using it, you may agree to consider it to be a standard rule, and

• You should agree and clearly announce what scenario you are

these points do not apply for it any more.

Maybe one Hero seems bet er or stronger to you, or perhaps • Any player who has not picked a Hero yet may disagree and same player, if they did not win the auction) picking a Hero.

they fi t your gaming style bet er. And for some scenarios or other

off er to sacrifi ce 1 or more Fame points to get that Hero instead.

• Mark the Fame lost by a player by put ing their Shield token

variant rules, certain Heroes may indeed be a bit stronger than

The player who original y picked the Hero must either match

on the last row of the Fame track (for example, they put their

others. According to the standard rules, the player who chooses

the off er, or give up on this Hero.

Shield on the space 118, and treats it as -2). The Heroes are stil

their character fi rst then has a disadvantage in the fi rst turn, as they

• If more players are interested, the next off er must be greater. It

on level 1, though, and nothing happens if they cross the end of

are the last to pick a Tactic card. If you feel this disadvantage is not

goes in rounds, like an auction, except that the players earlier in

the last line; they just continue on the fi rst line of the track.

enough, you may use these rules:

the selection order may just match the off er, they do not have to

• The Tactic cards for the fi rst round are picked in reverse order

• Randomly determine the player order for the Hero selection, as

increase.

to the Hero selection order (regardless of the Fame), to make up

per the standard rules.

• Once no one wants to increase, the player who off ered most (or

for the disadvantage of the player who was last in the auctions.

• When a player picks a Hero, they ask the others whether they

was earlier in selection order from the ones that off ered most)

agree. If all agree, they just take that Hero and the selection is

takes the Hero and loses the Fame. Others lose nothing and

over for them.

continue fol owing the same rules, with the next player (or the

Map Shape and Number of Tiles

However, after many games under your belt, you may notice that

That’s the game story, and it makes the cities diff erent not just by

The map shapes and number of tiles for the scenarios are just

limited amount of tiles cause some pat erns to repeat in the game

their gar ison and bonuses. If you want more variability, though,

recommended set ings. If you discover that you like some map

from time to time. If you want, you may use this rule:

you can do it a diff erent way:

shapes bet er, if you want more or less interaction at the start of

• When revealing a new tile (at the start of the game, or during it),

• Whenever a city tile is revealed, draw a random City card,

the game or during it, or if you want more or less tiles to explore,

it is rotated randomly. Add it to the map face down (so no one

and put the city of that color on the central space of the tile,

or even cities to conquer, feel free to choose diff erent map shapes

can see how it is oriented), and then fl ip it by any axis (choose

regardless of the space color.

and number of tiles.

the axis before seeing the tile content).

Note: You may also use random cities in scenarios where a fi xed

Random Tiles Orientation

Note: The symbols in the corners still have to connect, although

city is defi ned (for example: Green city in the “Druid Nights”

now, circles can connect to stars, creating ir egular shapes.

scenario), as it is usual y because of the city sur oundings, not the

The orientation of tiles is normal y fi xed, the player revealing

city color itself. In these cases, use the tile the scenario describes,

them having no choice in how to orient them. That’s right, Heroes

Random Cities

but when it is revealed, put a random city onto it.

are just discovering an unknown kingdom, not, say, building a

The cities have a fi xed position. The White city is always by a lake

medieval city in the south of France.

next to a keep, the Red city is in desert sur ounded by dragons, etc.

Each scenario goes Day, Night, Day, Night. . You may change this if

also do not see who defends keeps and towers, and what dangers

Darkness is Coming

you wish, just for variety.

lurk in the ruins.

You start with a Day round. At the end of the Round, roll two mana

Night Arrival

If using this, we recommend you roll the mana dice until there is no

dice. If any of them is black, night fal s and it is Night until the end

gold and no black at the start.

You may start with a Night round. Note this is more diffi cult: not

of the game. If not, continue with another Day round, and rol

only it is harder to use mana and travel through forests, but you

again at its end.

If your group is not too competitive, or if both new players and

No Interactive Skil s

Friendly Mana

experienced ones are playing together, you may use one or more

of these rules.

You may remove Skil s that aff ect other players – those with this

You may agree that during the Day, a player cannot use a gold die

icon (also note the skill description has a darker background

as mana of certain color if there is an unused die of that color in the

No Interactive Spel s

color on the Skill Description card).

Source. i.e. if there is a red die, you cannot use a gold die to power

You may remove Spell cards that hinder other players: Mana

No Player versus Player Combat

a red card, you have to use the red one. Also, you cannot reroll or

Meltdown, Mana Claim, Mind Read, and Energy Flow (109-112).

reset a gold die during the Day, as long as there is another non-gold

You may forbid players at acking each other. If a player ends their

die in the Source.

movement on a space with another player’s fi gure (except for cities

or the portal), the Forced Withdrawal rule applies for them.





This is a kind of side quest. You may add it to any scenario to spice

– If it was gold, also add one brown enemy to the usual

More Rampage!

it up.

green or red token. When fi ghting this enemy, you have to

For an even more extreme version of this variant:

This kingdom is under heavy raids. Ter orized people are very

fi ght both. The space is considered to contain a rampaging

suspicious and do not trust anyone.

enemy as long as there is at least one of these tokens. You

• Your characters start with -4 Reputation (i.e. They have -2

penalty to interaction).

• Your characters start with -2 Reputation (i.e. They have -1

get Reputation +1 for each enemy token defeated.

penalty to interaction).

• At the end of each Night, do the same, except this time cold

• At the end of each Day or Night, you roll a die for each defeated

rampaging enemy as above. However the rampaging enemy

• At the end of each Day, roll a mana die for each space where

colors (white, blue or black) count, and you add one extra

token is added always, and if a warm (during Day) or cold

a rampaging enemy was defeated. If a warm, living color was

brown enemy when black is rol ed.

(during Night) color is rol ed, you also add the brown one.

rol ed (red, green or gold), draw a new enemy to that space.

In this variant, another player not only oversees your combat,

– If it is blue, the enemy has +1 to Armor in the At ack phase.

Note: This variant is recommended especial y for two player

but they can also make some small decisions. The combat is less

– In all the above cases, the enemy is worth 1 more Fame for

games. When using it, it pays to watch the other player’s gaming

predictable, and in some cases, it may become a true duel of wits.

being defeated.

style. Sometimes, you can prevent the opponent from shooting

• This variant rule applies whenever a player starts a fi ght with

– If the color is black (or even green or gold, if you made a

the enemy by set ing it to white, sometimes you can cause serious

a single enemy (no mat er whether it is a rampaging one, or a

mistake), the enemy has no bonus, but there is also no extra

problems by increasing a nasty special at ack, and sometimes you

monster in dungeon, or the only defender left in the city after

Fame for it.

can even cause the enemy to survive because of the +1 Armor it

previous assaults etc.).

• The player who set the color reveals it at the start of the phase

gets (especial y when resistant). On the other hand, sometimes the

• When this happens, the player who played before that player

it has an eff ect. So, at the start of the Siege and Ranged At ack

player would just use a big enough At ack or Block anyway and

takes a spare mana die and secretly selects a color on it. They

phase, they either reveal the white die, or say “It is not white”.

increasing it by 1 would not change the outcome. Thus, you would

hide it with their hand, so the fi ghting player does not see the

Then at the start of the Block phase they either reveal the red

just give them more Fame.

color.

die or say “It is not red”. At the start of At ack phase, if not

– If it is white, the enemy has +1 to Armor in the Siege and

already revealed, they just reveal the die, no mat er what the

Ranged At ack phase.

color is.

– If it is red, the enemy has +1 to its At ack.

If you feel you would like to have more chance to tune your deck

– One point for each Advanced Action card.

Drafting at the Start

during the game, you may use one of the fol owing variants. We do

– One point for every two crystals.

not recommend them for your fi rst few games. Also, when using

This variant encourages long term planning. You plan some

– As many points as its level for each Unit (Wounded Units

these rules, your Hero’s strength rises faster, so you might want to

upgrades for your Hero ahead of time, and can adjust your

count as half, rounded down).

adjust the game diffi culty by increasing the city levels.

decisions during the game to suit your plan.

• To this score, add 3 points for every level you are above the

Note: If using one of these variants, and especial y with 4 players,

• After the characters are distributed (but before the map is set,

player who is of lowest level, and announce the result.

or when cards that al ow you to gain more Advanced Action

the dice rol ed and the off ers revealed), deal four cards from the

cards enter the game early, there is a chance you might run out • Then, starting from the player who had the lowest result (if tied, Advanced Action deck randomly to each player.

of Advanced Action cards. In that case, the monastery off er is

the one with the lower Fame, if still tied, the one who played

• Each player chooses one of these cards and sets it aside, passing

aff ected fi rst (do not deal cards there if there are none left). If there

later in the last round), each player may (but does not have to)

the remaining ones clockwise to the next player.

are not enough cards to replenish the Advanced Action off er, just

take one of the displayed Advanced Action cards and add it to

• Continue until each player has three cards set aside. Shuffl e the

use as many as you can. If there are none, the player who has to

their deck. At the same time, they also has to throw away one

ones no one picked back into the Advanced Action deck.

take a card gets nothing.

of their Action cards. The new card has to either be of the same

color or share at least one type (icon in the upper left corner) as

• Players keep the cards secretly in a safe place (ideal y away

Action Upgrades

the card thrown away.

from the playing table, so they do not get shuffl ed into their

decks accidental y).

This variant not only lets you tune your deck during the game, it

• Then, the card or cards no one picked are put to the bot om of

• At the end of each Day round, when players are shuffl ing their

also gives a slight advantage to those that are behind.

the Advanced Action deck.

decks, each player chooses one of these cards and shuffl es it

• At the end of each Night except the fi nal one (i.e. twice during

• Players should shuffl e their decks well before the next Round.

into their deck.

the standard 6-Round scenarios), reveal as many Advanced

Note: You might like this variant if you prefer a slower pace of

• Note: You may use these rules even when the scenario has

Action cards as the number of players plus 1.

game. It al ows you to take a break once or twice during the game

fewer than six rounds. Players just do not use all the cards they

• Then, players should examine their decks, and score their (depending on the number of rounds), to examine and review your picked.

strength. Use the fi rst three lines of the Achievements Scoring:

deck, and to think what it needs to work bet er. Also, if you agree,

– Two points for each Artifact or Spel .

players may take a look at the decks of other players now; during

the game itself, there may be not enough time for it.





The city levels for a given scenario are shown in the scenario

descriptions. Once you are experienced, you may increase the city



levels, especial y when using rules for a cooperative city assault.

Soon, you will see that even a city of level 11 can be conquered by

a single player, if they have real y strong cards and an army suitable

for a city assault.

Megapolis

If you fi nd out that even the highest level of cities is not enough of

a chal enge for you, or if you just want to spice things up, you may

turn one of the cities into a Megapolis. Note: This can only be done

in scenarios with three or less cities.

• Once you have agreed on the levels of regular cities, also agree

on the level of a Megapolis: it can be any number from 2 to 24.

It does not have to be higher than 11.

• The Megapolis should be always the last city revealed in the

• Treat this pair of cities as one big city:

game.

– You reveal the entire gar ison of the Megapolis from any

• If conquered, treat the Megapolis as one big city that has two

• When a Megapolis is revealed, place its fi gure and take its City

space adjacent to any of its spaces.

spaces. A player puts their fi gure onto the cor esponding card

card as usual. Then randomly choose one of the City cards not

– You can assault the Megapolis from any space adjacent to

to mark which part they are in. They may move from one part

used yet, and put it to the right of the fi rst City card. Also, take

any of its spaces.

to another during movement (for the standard city Move cost

the city fi gure of that color, and put it on the tile, one space right

of 2), or leave it by entering a space adjacent to the part they

from the fi rst city. The terrain (and, in the case of the Green

– You face the entire gar ison of the Megapolis. They are al

are cur ently in. Also, to chal enge a rampaging enemy when

city, also the symbol) on the space covered by the city fi gure is

fortifi ed, and benefi t from combat bonuses of both cities

in a city, the player has to be on the space adjacent to that

ignored.

simultaneously.

enemy.

• Set the level of each city as half of the Megapolis level. If the

– In case of a cooperative city assault, players adjacent to

– No mat er in which part of the city their Hero is, the player

number is odd, round up for the city on the left, and round

any space of the Megapolis can be invited. Randomize and

may use purchase options of both cities during interaction.

down for the city on the right. (So, the level of the Megapolis is

randomly deal all enemies, no mat er who stands next to

– During scoring, a Megapolis counts as only one city. Note:

the sum of the both city levels.) Draw gar ison tokens for both

which part of the city.

Scoring does not take city level into account.

cities, and add them together as the Megapolis gar ison (it does

– The Megapolis is conquered once all defenders are • If you decide to play a scenario with two Megapolis, add a not mat er which was drawn for which city).

eliminated. Determine a City leader as normal.

random city to the fi rst revealed city tile. The other two cities

will go to the second city tile, even if it happens to be the color

you added to the fi rst Megapolis.

• Players: 2 to 4 (plus a solo variant)

Special Rules





Scoring


• Type: Slightly competitive

• A player scores 1 Fame whenever they reveal a new tile, no

Apply standard Achievements scoring. Whoever has the most

• Length: Three rounds (2 days and 1 night)

mat er which type.

Fame, wins. If tied, the players share the victory.

• Purpose: Training scenario. Strongly recommended whenever

• No Player vs. Player combat is al owed (unless you agree





Solo Variant


any player plays the game for the fi rst time, as it provides a

otherwise).

natural way to learn the game rules and get familiar with them.

• For the fi rst game, there should be at least one Unit in the off er

If you want to try your fi rst mission solo, play with 8 countryside

tiles (as in a 2-player game), but adjust the game length to four

On your fi rst mission, you will be sent to an unknown part of the

with the village icon on the left side of the card. If not,

rounds (2 days and 2 nights).

Atlantean kingdom, your task is to locate its Capital. That’s al . Al

shuffl e the cards and deal them until this is true.

the Fame, any knowledge and treasures you manage to get during • Elite Units are not used in this scenario.

Use a Dummy player (see page 15), and special rules for Tactic

your mission are yours to keep.

selection from the Solo Conquest mission (page 19). When

• You should not reveal Spells and Advanced Action cards until

scoring, award no titles.

For a detailed description of this scenario, see the Game

they are needed for the fi rst time.

Walkthrough. Here is just a summary:

However, if you just want to become familiar with the mechanics,





Scenario End


you may also ignore the Dummy player in your fi rst game, and

Map (for 2, 3, or 4 players)

When a player reveals a city, all players (including themselves)

enjoy the experience with one hero and no pressure.

• Map Shape: Wedge with no limitations

have one last turn. If the Round ends during this, the game ends

• Countryside tiles: 8, 9, or 11, sorted by numbers

immediately.

• Core city tiles: 1

• Core non-city tiles: 2

• Cities: Cities cannot be conquered nor entered in this scenario.





• Players: 2 to 4

Scenario End





Variants


• Type: Competitive

When all cities are conquered, all players (including the one who

If experienced, you can increase the level of the cities. But beware

• Length: Six rounds (3 days and 3 nights)

conquered the last city) have one last turn. If the Round ends

– even with the suggested set ings, this is a long scenario.

• Purpose: Standard game scenario, in which you use all the

during this, the game ends immediately.





Team Game


game features. Can be long, especial y with 4 players or when





Scoring


players are not experienced yet.

If playing with four, you may decide to play this as a team game

Apply standard Achievements scoring. In addition, also score for

(see the General Principles section).

Your task is to fi nd and conquer all cities in three days and three conquered Cities, as described on the other side of the Scoring nights. Each of you will be on your own, and as usual, you want

In this case, you may either keep four cities in the game, or you may

card.

to get as much Fame, knowledge, and loot as possible. Luckily for

decide to encourage cooperative city assaults by using only two

you, conquering cities is a great way to get Fame.

• A player scores 7 Fame for each city they are the leader of.

city tiles, and set the level of cities to 10 or higher. Or, you can use

• A player scores 4 Fame for each city they are not the leader of two Megapolis instead (see the Variants section).

Map (for 2, 3, or 4 players)

but has at least one of their shield tokens on the City card.

• Map Shape: Wedge (2 or 3 players), or Ful y Open (4 players)

• Whoever scores the most Fame for this gets an additional +5

• Countryside tiles: 8, 9, or 11

Fame as the Greatest City Conqueror (+2 Fame if tied).

• Core city tiles: 2, 3, or 4 (the same number as there are players)

If you conquered all the cities, your mission was successful.

• Core non-city tiles: 1, 2, or 3 (one less than players)

Whether you did or not, whoever has most Fame wins the game.

• Cities: Each revealed city is level 4.

• Players: 2 to 4

Special Rules





Scoring


• Type: Competitive

• You start with 1 Fame. Whenever you cross a line on the Fame

You score Achievements and conquered Cities (on both sides of

• Length: Four rounds (2 days and 2 nights)

track, you get 1 extra Fame.

Scoring card), as with the standard Conquest scenario.

• Purpose: Shorter scenario that shares most of the mechanics • You start with +2 Reputation (i.e. you have a bonus of +1 for Variants

with the standard game, but is faster.

interaction right from the start).

You can adjust the level of the cities according to your preferences.

Again, your task is to conquer all cities. You have only two days and • There is one more die in the Source and one more Unit in the two nights this time, so you were imbued with extra power. And

off er than usual.

again, whoever scores most Fame is the winner.





Scenario End


Map (for 2, 3, or 4 players)

When all cities are conquered, all players (including the one who

• Map Shape: Wedge (2 or 3 players), or Open limted to 4

conquered the last city) have one last turn. If the Round ends

columns (4 players)

during this, the game ends immediately.

• Countryside tiles: 6, 7, or 9

• Core city tiles: 2, 3, or 4 (equal to the number of players)

• Core non-city tiles: 1, 2, or 3 (one less than players)

• Cities: Each revealed city is of level 3.

• Players: 1

Special Rules





Variants


• Type: Solo

• When taking Tactics, you always choose fi rst. The Dummy

You may adjust the city levels to set up the right chal enge for you.

• Length: Six rounds (3 days and 3 nights)

player then takes one random card from those remaining.

You may also use a Megapolis.

• Purpose: Solitaire game. Also suitable for a player who wants

• At the end of each Day or Night, remove both used Tactic cards





Other Solo Missions


to understand the game before explaining it to others.

from the game. That means, each Tactic card is picked exactly

This is a standard solo mission. If you wish though, you may play

Yes, that’s true – you are alone now. But the Council still needs

once during the game.

any other mission as solo, just use similar setup modifi cations and

these cities to be conquered. Good luck!





Scenario End


Special rules as this mission.





Map


When all cities are conquered, you have one last turn (the Dummy

• Map Shape: Wedge

player does not).

• Countryside tiles: 7





Scoring


• Core city tiles: 2

If you succeed in defeating all cities, you are victorious. If not, you

• Core non-city tiles: 2

have failed. In both cases you may count your score, to see how

• Cities: the fi rst revealed city is of level 5, the second revealed

good you were.

city is of level 8.

Take your Fame as the base. Then apply standard Achievements

• Dummy Player: There is one standard Dummy player (see the

scoring, except no titles are awarded.

General Principles section).

Then score for your goal and for the time to reach it. See the other

• Cards and Skills: Remove the four competitive Spells (109-

side of the Scoring card:

112) from the Spell deck, and the one interactive Skil , marked

• Score 10 points for each city you conquered.

with this icon , from the player’s Skill deck.

• Score an additional 15 points, if you conquered all cities.

• If you fi nished the game one or more Rounds before the limit,

score 30 points for each such Round.

• Score 1 point for each card in the Dummy player’s Deed deck

(that was not yet fl ipped this Round).

• If the End of the Round was not announced yet in your last

Round, score an additional 5 points.





• Players: 2 or 3





Special Rules


Then score for your goal and for the time to reach it. See the other

• Type: Cooperative

• When taking Tactics, the Dummy player takes a random Tactic

side of the Scoring card:

• Length: Six rounds (3 days and 3 nights)

fi rst, then the players choose theirs.

• Score 10 points for each city you conquered.

• Purpose: Standard cooperative scenario – the ultimate

• At the end of the Day or Night, agree and remove one of the

• Score an additional 10 points if every player is a leader of at

chal enge for those who want to beat the game together.

Tactics used by the players (not the Dummy player) from the

least one conquered city.

Your task is to conquer all cities. You have to work as a team, and

game. This does not mat er on the last day and the last night.

• Score an additional 15 points if you conquered all cities.

you will also be rewarded as a team, according to your weakest • Team Rules apply, except you are all one team. (see the General • If you fi nished the game one or more Rounds before the Round link and best achievements.

principles section).

limit, score 30 points for each such Round.

Map (for 2 or 3 players)





Scenario End


• Score 1 point for each card in the Dummy player’s Deed deck

• Map Shape: Fully open

When all cities are conquered, all players except the Dummy

(that was not yet fl ipped this Round).

• Countryside tiles: 8, or 10

player have one last turn.

• If the End of the Round was not announced yet in your last

Round, score an additional 5 points.

• Core city tiles: 3, or 4 (one more than players)





Scoring


• Core non-city tiles: 2, or 3 (equal to number of players)

If you succeed in defeating all cities, you are all victorious. If not,





Variants


• Cities: The cities are of level 5, except for the fi nal one revealed,

you have all failed. In both cases you may count your score, to see

You may adjust the city levels to set up the right chal enge for you.

which is of level 8 (2 players) , or 11 (3 players)

how good you were.

In a 2 player game, the last city may also be a Megapolis – see the

• Dummy Player: There is one standard Dummy player (see the

You have one score as a team. As a base score, take the lowest

Variants section.

General Principles section).

Fame of all players. Then apply standard Achievements scoring,

You may also agree on a scoring variant: for Achievements, only

• Cards and Skil s: Remove the four competitive Spel s from the

except:

the lowest score counts. This encourages balanced development

Spell deck (109-112), and and the one interactive Skil , marked

• In each category, you score only the player with highest score

of all Heroes instead of specialization. (For the Greatest Beating

with this icon , from the player’s Skill deck.

(or most negative points in case of Greatest Beating).

Achievement, the biggest penalty is scored again.)

• No titles are awarded.

• Players: 2 or 3

Map (for 2 or 3 players)





Additional Special Rules


• Type: Cooperative

• Countryside tiles: 7 or 8

• You start with 1 Fame. Whenever you cross a line on the Fame

• Length: Four rounds (2 days and 2 nights)

• Core city tiles: 2 or 3 (equal to number of players)

track, you get 1 extra Fame.

• Purpose: Shorter, cooperative scenario, that shares most of the

• Core non-city tiles: 1 or 2 (one less than players)

• You start with +2 Reputation (i.e. you have a bonus of +1 for

mechanics with the standard one, but is easier and faster.

• Cities: In order in which they are revealed, the cities are of level

interaction right from the start).

Again, your task is to conquer all cities. You have only two days

5 and 8 (2 players), or 5, 8, and 11 (3 players).

• There is one more die in the Source and one more Unit in the

and two nights this time, so you were imbued with special powers.

off er than usual.

All the rules and setup conditions for Full Cooperation apply, with

these modifi cations:

• Players: 2 to 4

Special Rules





Scenario End


• Type: Competitive

• When a mine is revealed, put one green (if on a Countryside tile)

When all map tiles are revealed and all mines are liberated, al

• Length: Four rounds (2 days and 2 nights)

or red (if on a Core tile) enemy token on it, face up. Also, add one

players (including the one who conquered the last mine) have one

• Purpose: A shorter scenario similar to the standard one, but

brown enemy token, face down. These are enemies controlling

last turn. If the Round ends during this, the game ends immediately.

with diff erent goals. Fight in the tunnels!

the mine (one is hidden in the deeps). Ar ange them in a way





Scoring


Mines in this friendly kingdom are occupied by enemies! Without

that the reverse of the brown one is visible, too, to distinguish

If you liberated all mines, the mission was successful.

a supply of crystals, Mages cannot serve the land. Go there and

them from rampaging enemies.

regain them.

• To liberate a mine, you may enter it from its space (as an Action).

In any case, apply standard Achievements scoring. In addition:

Fight both enemies. Night rules apply as in a Dungeon (but you

• A player scores 4 Fame for each of their mines in Countryside

Map (for 2, 3, or 4 players)

can use your Units). If you do not defeat both, the remaining

and 7 Fame for each mine on Core tiles.

• Map Shape: Wedge (2 or 3 players), or Open limited to 4

token(s) stay on the space. They can be at acked again later.

• Whoever scores the most Fame for this gets an additional +5

columns (4 players)

• Whoever defeats the last enemy liberates the mine. They mark

Fame as the Greatest Liberator.

• Countryside tiles: 8, 9, or 11 (remove only tiles with no mines

it and gain +1 Reputation (+2, if on a Core tile).

on them).

• Until liberated, mines produce no crystals. Once liberated, they

• Core city tiles: 1 (always the red city)

produce as usual (the production starts immediately, so the

• Core non-city tiles: 1, 2, or 3 (the one without a mine is always

conqueror gets one crystal on the turn they liberated the mine).

amongst the removed ones).

• At the start of Day or Night, each player gains one crystal from

• Cities: The city is friendly. Each player puts one Shield token on

every mine they already conquered, no mat er how far away it

it, but no-one is its leader.

is on the map. Just a gift from the grateful miners.

• Note: If there are not enough brown tokens, use some

substitute for the brown monsters that are on the map but not

revealed yet. Draw a new brown monster when it is about to be

revealed.





• Players: 2 to 4

Special Rules





Scenario End


• Type: Slightly competitive, or competitive

• When ending your movement on a magical glade, you may

When all players have performed the incantation during the

• Length: Four rounds (2 days and 2 nights)

activate it – mark the glade with your Shield token. There

second Night (in that case, each player has one more turn), or at

• Purpose: A shorter scenario similar to the standard one, but

may be multiple tokens on each glade, but only one from each

the end of the second Night.

with diff erent goals. How big a chal enge dare you encounter?

player.





Scoring


Have you noticed the mysterious obelisks with engraved symbols • Once during the fi rst Night, in any of your turns, you may Do the standard Achievements scoring. Whoever has the most on the magical glades around this kingdom? Go and investigate!

perform an incantation. You may not be at an inhabited space

and it counts as your Action for that turn. It summons one

Fame, wins the game.

Map (for 2, 3, or 4 players)

monster for each glade you have your Shield token on – draw





Variants


• Map Shape: Wedge (2 or 3 players), or Open limited to 4

that many brown enemies and fi ght them.

You may play a more competitive variant: only one (with 2 players)

columns (4 players)

– The ones you defeat bring you twice as many Fame.

or two (with 3 or 4 players) Shield tokens can be placed on each

• Countryside tiles: 8, 9, or 11 (remove only tiles with no

– The ones you do not defeat disappear after the combat (but

glade. If a glade is already at its limit, choose and replace one from

magical glades on them).

the Wounds they did do not).

another player.

• Core city tiles: 1 (always the green city)

– Regardless how many of them you defeated, at the end of

With fewer players, you may also play an Epic, 3 days and 3 nights

• Core non-city tiles: 1, 2, or 3 (one less than the player number).

your turn you get one random crystal for each monster you

version. Use all Countryside and Core non-city tiles. Remove the

• Cities: The city is friendly. Each player puts one Shield token on

summoned (roll a die for each, like in a monster den).

Shields after the second Night, too. During the third Night, you

it, but no-one is its leader.

• At the end of the fi rst Night, remove all Shield tokens from the

summon one brown and one red enemy for each magical glade

glades. Players have to mark them again, if they want to use

you have marked, and get three crystals for each pair summoned.

them for an incantation the second night.

• During the second Night, you may do the same, except this

time you summon red enemies. The Fame for defeated ones is

doubled again, and this time you get two random crystals for

each enemy.

• Players: 2 to 4

Special Rules





Scenario End


• Type: Competitive

• Whenever a tile with a village is revealed, the player who

When all map tiles are revealed and all dungeons and tombs are

• Length: Five rounds (3 days and 2 nights)

revealed it chooses any accessible non-swamp space adjacent

conquered, all players (including the one who conquered last tomb

• Purpose: A shorter scenario similar to the standard one, but

to that village (it can even be on a neighboring tile) that has no

or dungeon) have one last turn. If the Round ends during this, the

with diff erent goals. Let’s go underground.

site on it. From now on, there is a secret dungeon entrance on

game ends immediately.

We thought we already control ed this land. We were wrong!

this space. Put a face down brown enemy token on the space to





Scoring


There is a vast system of underground tunnels under the kingdom.

mark it.

If you conquered all the dungeon and tombs, the mission was

We do not know who dug these tunnels and why, but we do not • A secret dungeon entrance works like any other dungeon (see successful.

care. Go, and seize control of them!

its description card). If you conquer it, mark the space and

claim your reward. If you fail, discard the monster token and

In any case, apply standard Achievements scoring, except:

Map (for 2, 3, or 4 players)

put another random brown enemy on that tile.

• When scoring Adventures, also count the secret dungeons and

• Map Shape: Wedge (2 or 3 players), or Open limited to 4

• The same applies for monasteries except you put a red enemy

tombs. All dungeons and tombs give 4 points instead of 2.

columns (4 players)

token to an adjacent empty space to mark there is a secret

• Instead of the Greatest Adventurer title, Greatest Dungeon

• Countryside tiles: 8, 9, or 11 (remove only tiles with no

tomb.

Crawler title is awarded, and it is worth +5 points (+2 if shared).

dungeons on them).

• The secret tomb works the same way as regular tombs.

• Core city tiles: 1 (always the Blue city)

• Conquered dungeons and tombs (both regular and secret ones)

• Core non-city tiles: 1, 2, or 3 (always include the desert tile

cannot be entered again to fi ght for more Fame in this scenario.

with monastery and tomb).

• All conquered tombs and dungeons (including the secret ones)

• Cities: The city is friendly. Each player puts one Shield token on

are connected.

it, but no-one is its leader.

– When on a conquered dungeon or tomb space during

movement, you may move to any other conquered dungeon

or tomb space.

– These two spaces do not have to be of the same type (you

may travel from a regular dungeon to a hidden tomb etc.)

– To do so, you have to pay 2 Move points plus 1 Move point

for each space you traveled.

– When measuring the distance, you have to go through

revealed spaces, and you have to avoid lakes and swamps. If

it is not possible, you cannot travel there.





• Players: 2, or 4 (two teams)

Special Rules





Team Rules


• Type: Very competitive

• Deal Regular (silver) Units only during the fi rst half of the game.

• If playing with four, Team Rules apply (see the Variants section).

• Length: Four rounds (4 players), six rounds (2 players)

Deal both Regular and Elite Units during the second half (from

• Especial y note this rule (from the Variants section): A player

• Purpose: A very competitive scenario full of opportunities for

Round 3 in a four player game, or from Round 4 in a three

may enter a keep owned by their al y, and they can recruit Units

Heroes to fi ght each other. Victory points for control ed sites

player game).

there. When in, or close to an al ied keep, their Hand limit is also

instead of Fame!

• The Units that can be recruited in monasteries can also be

increased, but only for the keeps they own themselves, if any.

You are sent to this problematic province by the Council of the

recruited in mage towers. The Units that can be recruited in

• The same applies to mage towers and extra mana.

Void. . wel . . to be exact. . by the . . um. . righteous members of

villages may also be recruited in keeps.

the Council of the Void. . to seize control over it. Just beware, there • There is no reputation loss for assaulting keeps and towers in The Winner is another faction of treacherous Council members that wants to

this scenario.

The scenario is played until end of the Round limit, or until one

control the region. Do not al ow them!

• The mage towers work diff erently than normal; in this scenario

side admits the other side has won. Each owned keep counts as

3 Victory points. Each owned mage tower counts as 2 Victory

Map (for 2, 3, or 4 players)

they work similar to keeps.

points. The player or team who has the most points wins the

• Map Shape: Predefi ned.

– When you conquer a mage tower, you get no Spel . You can

game. If tied (i.e. if some sites were left unconquered, as there are

See the picture. Use the

still buy Spells there later.

25 points available in the game), no one is the winner.

B side of the starting

– When you conquer a mage tower, it becomes yours, like a

tile, three revealed

keep. Other players can assault it, like a keep: they fi ght a





Variants


Countryside tiles, and

randomly drawn fortifi ed violet enemy, for half of the Fame,

• For a more strategic game, you may reveal the map tiles from

predefi ned positions

rounded up.

the very start (if you will not miss the thrill of exploring).

where another 2

– If you start your turn in or next to your mage tower, you get

• You can also play this scenario with 3 players, but it can suff er

Countryside and 4 Core

one gold mana (during Day) or black mana (during Night)

from the “if two fi ght each other, the third one benefi ts”

tiles can be revealed (you

for every mage tower you control on the map.

syndrome. If you want to anyway, we recommend to play four

may put them there, face

• When close to both your keep and mage tower, you benefi t

rounds only, as in a 4 player game.

down, when set ing up the game).

from both!

• Countryside tiles: 5 (all the ones with forts and mage towers).

• During the second Day and Night, you draw two random gray

• Core city tiles: 1 (always the White city)

(for keeps) or violet (for mage tower) enemy tokens when

• Core non-city tiles: 3 (all the ones with forts and mage

at acking a keep or tower owned by another player. The total

towers).

fame for defeating them is added together and then halved

• City: The city was friendly, but it closed its gates. You are not

(round up).

al owed to enter it.

• During the third Day and Night (in a 2 player game), the same

• Units: Remove level IV Units (the ones that can be recruited in

applies, except you draw three instead.

a city only) from the Elite Units deck.

• Players: 2 to 4

Special Rules





Team Variant


• Type: Very competitive

• The portal closes at the end of the Day 1 (whoever is on the

If playing with four, you may play this scenario in teams. All the

• Length: Four rounds (2 days and 2 nights)

portal at that time would be eliminated from the game). From

Team Rules apply (see the General Principles section).

• Purpose: A competitive scenario suitable for those who prefer

now on, the portal works as an empty plain space – only

At the start of the game, each team chooses randomly (or by

“last man standing” types of games over the end game scoring.

one player can be there, and combat can be initiated there decision, if you prefer) a Shield token of one of its members.

This is an ultimate test of your power. You are sent to an unknown

(including Forced Withdrawal rules).

This player is the chosen one – the one that has to return. Their

part of the kingdom and the portal closes after you go through it. The Winner

teammate has to help, especial y by blocking the other team.

After two days and two nights, the portal opens again for a short The scenario ends as soon as the second Night is over. Whoever The opposing team should not know which player has been while. Only the hero who is at the portal at that moment can return stands on the portal space at that moment wins the game. If no- chosen. Store both Shield tokens (one from each team) secretly in home.

one stands there, there is no winner. There is no scoring, and Fame

a safe place.

Map (for 2, 3, or 4 players)

does not mat er.

At the end of the second Night, reveal these Shield tokens. If one of

them belongs to a player that cur ently stands on the portal, their

• Map Shape: Wedge (or any other you agree)

Note: After End of the Night is announced, initiating Player vs.

team has won the game. If no player stands on the portal, or if a

• Countryside tiles: 7, 8, 10

Player combat is not al owed. Thus, if the portal is occupied at the

player whose Shield token was not chosen stands there, no one

• Core city tiles: 1, 2, or 3 (one less than players)

moment when end of the second Night is announced, the player

occupying it wins.

has won the game.

• Core non-city tiles: 1, 2, or 3 (one less than players)

• Cities: Each revealed city is of level 3.





Variants


You may play an Epic version that lasts 3 Days and 3 Nights. Add

one tile of each type to the game, and increase the level of cities

to 4.

MAGE KNIGHT ULTIMATE EDITION Rulebook editing: Gaming Rules! - Paul Grogan & Phil Pet ifer

A GAME BY VLAADA CHVÁTIL

Playtesting: Playtesters: Filip, David, Hanka, Miloš, Aneken, Vítek, Kreten, Fanda,

Michal, Flygon, Paul, Falco, Glee, Rumun, Monča, Ese, Yuyka, Jéňa, Bianco, Jirka

Original Game Design: Vlaada Chvátil

Bauma, and many others from Czech Republic, US and UK.

www.wizkids.com

Development Team: Vlaada Chvátil, David Korejtko, Filip

Special thanks to: Filip Murmak for enthusiasm and valuable help from the very fi rst

Murmak, Phil Pet ifer, Paul Grogan

WizKids/NECA, LLC

moment they learned the game to the moment it went to print. David Korejtko for 603 Sweetland Ave.

Il ustrations: J. Lonnee, Milan Vavroň, Octographics.net

Hillside, NJ 07205 USA

many hours of playtesting and balancing. Paul Grogan, Philip Pet ifer, and friends

Graphic Design: Chris Raimo, Filip Murmak, Scot Hartman

for endless days (and nights) of rules proofreading and language cor ections. Bryan

Kinsella and Wilson Price from WizKids for their help and valuable advice. WizKids

and Czech Games Edition for their support with extensive playtesting.

© 2018 WizKids/NECA, LLC. WizKids and related marks and logos are trademarks of WizKids. All rights reserved.

22





GAME

COMBAT WITH ENEMIES

PLAYER VERSUS PLAYER

Choose scenario and variants.





Ranged and Siege Attack phase


COMBAT


Players choose Heroes.


– Perform none, one or more at acks. You may defeat one

Defender declares their intention:





Setup the game.


or more enemies with each.

– If they at end the at ack ful y, they may do all as in their

Play the Rounds, until Round limit or end conditions.

– Play Ranged and Siege At acks of total value equal to or

turn, including end of turn processing, they are protected





Determine the game outcome.


higher than the chosen enemies Armor to defeat them

(Siege at acks only if some of these enemies are fortifi ed).

until their next turn, but they lose their next turn.

– Gain Fame for each defeated enemy (but do not Level up

– If not, they may not use mana or Skil s, and their reaction

ends immediately after the end of combat.

ONE ROUND

yet) and discard its token.

Block phase





Ranged and Siege Attacks phase


Prepare the Round (not on the fi rst Round):

– Perform none, one or more blocks. You may block one

– Players take turns, starting with the defender, playing

– Flip Day/Night board and refresh the Source.

enemy with each block.

Ranged and Siege At acks, until both forfeit their chance.

– Create a new Unit off er.

– Play Block of total value equal to or higher than the

– The player at acking plays any amount of Ranged and

– Refresh Advanced Action and Spell off ers.

chosen enemy at ack to block it.

Siege At acks (Siege only if the defender is fortifi ed).

– Players Ready their Units and fl ip back Skill tokens.





Assign Damage phase


– The other player may play Blocks to reduce the at ack. It is

– Players reshuffl e their decks and draw new cards.

– For each enemy that was not defeated or blocked, assign

reduced by 1 for every 2 points of Block.





Players choose Tactics


damage equal to its At ack value (in any order).

– The remaining at ack is assigned as damage by the

at acker to the opponent’s Units and Hero. Damage

– Lowest Fame (the later in Round Order, if tied), goes fi rst.

– First, you may assign damage to Unwounded units. Give

equal to Armor has to be assigned to wound a Hero or an

– Rear ange the Round Order tokens.

it a Wound and reduce the damage by an amount equal to

Unwounded Unit.

Players play turns in order, until someone announces the End of

the Unit’s Armor.





Melee Attacks phase


the Round.

– Then, assign the rest to your Hero. For each Wound you

– Players take turns playing At acks, starting with the

– Other players then have one last turn.

take to your hand, reduce the damage by Hero’s Armor.





Attack phase


aggressor, until someone is forced to retreat or until both

– Perform none, one or more at acks. You may defeat one

forfeit their chance.

ONE TURN

or more enemies with each.

– The player at acking plays any amount of At acks

(including Ranged and Siege ones, or a card played

If your Deed deck is empty, you may forfeit your turn to – Play any At acks (including Ranged and Siege ones, or sideways).

announce the End of the Round.

a card played sideways) of total value equal to or higher

than the chosen enemies Armor to defeat them.

– The other player may play Blocks to reduce the at ack. It is

– If your hand is also empty, you have to do this.

– Gain Fame for each defeated enemy (but do not Level up

reduced by 1 for every 1 point of Block.

Regular turn: Optional movement (and/or map revealing), then

yet) and discard its token.

– The remaining At ack is assigned as damage (see above),

optional (sometimes mandatory) action:

and/or converted to Move points to force the player to

– Combat with enemies (assault to a fortifi ed site, provoking

withdraw to a neighboring safe space, and/or used to steal

or chal enging rampaging enemies, entering an adventure

used Artifacts or Banners assigned to a Wounded Unit (5

site).

damage per Artifact).

– Interaction with locals (recruiting, healing and buying

If the opponent is forced to retreat, then gain 1 Fame if they

cards for Infl uence).

have more Fame than you, plus 2 for each level they are higher

– Player vs. Player combat (if on the same space as

than you.

anopponent).

Resting: no movement, no action.

– Standard rest: discard one non-Wound and any number

of Wound cards.

– Slow recovery (if you have Wound cards only): discard

one Wound card.

Any turn:

– Play any special and healing (if not in combat) eff ects.

– Use up to one die from the Source.

End of the turn:

– Return (and rerol ) the mana dice used. Next player may

play now.

– Do Forced Withdrawal, if you are not on a safe place.

– Discard played cards, return all mana except crystals.

– Claim your combat rewards, and process Level ups, if any.

– Discard any number of cards from your hand (at least one

if no cards were played this turn.).

– Draw cards up to your (modifi ed) Hand limit.

23





Offensive

Defensive

Unit Resistances

Fortifi ed – Only Siege At acks can be used against

Combat with enemies:

Fire Attack – Only Ice and Cold Fire Blocks are

this enemy in the Ranged and Siege At acks phase

If the Unit is assigned damage from an at ack it is resistant to, the

effi cient when blocking this (others are halved).

(no at acks at all if it also defends a fortifi ed site).

damage is reduced by its Armor fi rst (without taking Wounds). If

any damage remains, continue as normal (wound the Unit and

Ice Attack – Only Fire and Cold Fire Blocks are

reduce the damage by its Armor again).

effi cient when blocking this (others are halved).

Physical Resistance – All physical At acks (incl.

cards played sideways) are ineffi cient (halved).

Player vs. Player:

If the Unit is resistant to at least one element included in the

Cold Fire Attack – Only Cold Fire Blocks are effi cient

opponent’s at ack, the opponent has to spend twice as much

when blocking this (others are halved).

Fire Resistance – All Fire At acks are ineffi cient

damage to wound that Unit.

(halved).

Summon Attack – At the start of the Block phase,

The enemy ignores any non-At ack eff ects of red

Physical Resistance – Makes the Unit less

draw a random Brown token for this enemy. It

cards or Unit abilities powered by red mana.

vulnerable to physical At acks of enemies and

replaces the enemy in the Block and Assign Damage

physical At acks of an opponent.

phases, then it is discarded.

Ice Resistance – All Ice At acks are ineffi cient

(halved).

Fire Resistance





Swift


– Makes the Unit less vulnerable to

– To block this enemy, you need twice as much

The enemy ignores any non-At ack eff ects of blue

Fire At acks of enemies and Fire At acks of an

Block as its At ack value.

cards or Unit abilities powered by blue mana.

opponent.

It also ignores non-At ack eff ects of opponent’s red

Brutal – If unblocked, it deals twice as much damage

Both Fire and Ice Resistance – Also all Cold Fire

cards or Unit abilities powered by red mana.

as its At ack value.

At acks are ineffi cient (halved).

Ice Resistance – Makes the Unit less vulnerable

Poison – If a Unit gets Wounded because of an at ack

Elusive – An elusive enemy has an increased

to Ice At acks of enemies and Ice At acks of an

from an enemy with Poison, it is given two Wound

Armor value. The lower value is used only in the

opponent.

cards instead of one.

At ack phase, and only if all of the enemy at acks

It also ignores non-At ack eff ects of opponent’s blue

For each Wound a Hero takes into their hand from

are successful y Blocked. Any Armor modifi cations

cards or Unit abilities powered by blue mana.

a Poisonous at ack, they also puts one Wound into

apply to both values.

their discard pile.

Both Fire and Ice Resistance – Also counts as

Paralyze – If a Unit gets Wounded because of an

Unfortifi ed – All site fortifi cations are ignored for

resistance to Cold Fire At acks of enemies and

at ack from an enemy with Paralyze, it is immediately

such an enemy.

Cold Fire At acks of an opponent.

destroyed (removed from the game).

If a Hero takes one or more Wounds into their hand

Arcane Immunity – The enemy is not aff ected by

from a Paralyzing at ack, they must immediately

any non-At ack/Block eff ects. Eff ects that directly

discard any non-Wound cards from their hand.

aff ect enemy at acks still apply.

Assassination – Damage from this at ack cannot

be assigned to Units; if unblocked, it has to be al

Defend – Enemies with the Defend ability wil

assigned to the hero.

defend themselves or other enemies when you

at ack them.

Cumbersome – In the Block phase, you may spend

Move points; for each Move point spent, the at ack

is reduced by 1 for the rest of the turn. An at ack

Multiple Attacks

reduced to 0 is considered successful y blocked.

Each at ack has to be handled (blocked or get their

damage assigned) separately. Eff ects that prevent an

Vampiric – An enemy with the Vampiric ability has its

enemy from at acking prevent all their at acks. An

Armor value increased by 1, for the rest of the combat,

enemy is considered "successful y blocked" if all its

for each unit its at acks wound and for each wound its

at acks are blocked.

at acks cause to be added to a player’s hand.

You MAY Announce End of the Round

YES





YOUR TURN


Is your


Before your

Before your

Deed deck

turn or

Your previous

Movement

Action

turn or

empty?

In another

turn Skill

End of Turn

Special and

Special and

In another

player’s turn

tokens expire

Is your

sequence

healing eff ects





OR


healing eff ects


player’s turn

eff ects

Round Order

eff ects

token face down?

One Rest action





YES


Flip your Round Order token


24





